         CONTROL OF WORMS IN
        CATTLE, SHEEP AND GOATS



              Extension Bulletin No: 172
               Livestock Series No: 22




NATIONAL AGRICULTURAL EXTENSION AND RESEARCH LIAISON
                      SERVICES
              AHMADU BELLO UNIVERSITY
                     P.M.B. 1067
                   ZARIA NIGERIA.




                       July 2000
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT

This title was one of the kind suggestions of the Director NAERLS.
Special thanks to the Publication Review Committee on the bulletin and
to Livestock and Fisheries Programme for the most constructive
criticism. The type settings was done by Mr. Edison Uro and Mrs
Comfort Arotiba. All refrence materials sited on the subject are
appreciated and acknowledged.

                            A. I. Annatte

                                2002
                                    TABLE OF CONTENT

1. Acknowledgement.........................................................          i
2. Table of Content............................................................      1
3. Introduction...................................................................   2
4. Types and signs of worm infestation...............................                2
5. How worms live.............................................................       3
6. General rules of hygiene in worm control.......................                   5
        * Drinking Hygiene................................................           5
        * Hygiene of range lands and pasture......................                   5
        * Hygiene of animal House and pen.......................                     6
        * Animal Behaviour and Hygiene..........................                     6
7. How to control worms....................................................          6
8. How to control worms with local medicine....................                      7
9. How to control worms with Anthelmintics.....................                      8
10. How to administer drugs to animals.............................                  10
11. How to drench animals.................................................           10
12. How to give animals bolus............................................            10
13. Choosing the right worm medicine from the market.....                            11
14. How to avoid using unsuitable drugs.............................                 11
15. Preparation and application of dewormer.....................                     12
16. Precautionary measures...............................................            13
17. Comon worms of cattle sheep and Goats......................                      13




                                                      2
A.     INTRODUCTION

Worms are living things which during all or part of their lives live at the
expense of another, called hosts, causing it some damage but not necessarily
destroying it. Generally, worms have privilege habitats within their hosts such
as intestine, live, muscle, blood etc. Some worms are called “specific worms”
because they develop only within certain species. Example is worm called
stongyes that lives in the stomach of sheep. Some other in specific organ such
as liver flukes in the liver of cow.
         In order to establish and maintain healthy growth in animals, certain
practices are very essential. These practices include the control of worms,
vaccination, sanitary hygiene, routine clinical checks. Sanitary hygiene, in
Farm animals include keeping the animals body clean, proving clean and
balance feed, and water, providing clean housing environment and pens. It
also include keeping farm utensils clean at all times. This guide will teach
farmers and animal attendants about how to view and carry out these practices
more effectively.

B.     TYPES AND SIGNS OF WORM INFESTATION

1.     Worms affecting domestic animals can be differentied into four main
       groups namely:

i      Nematodes (Round worms)
ii     Cestodes (Tape worm)
iii    Trematodes (Flat worms)
iv     Protozan (Coccidia)



                                               Figure 1: Round worms

                                      3
2.      Worm infestations generally result in
i. Poor health
ii. Low productivity
iii. Loss of profit
iv. Waste of time of the farmer


                    Figure 2: COW WITH HEAVY WORM BURDEN


3.    Round worms and flat worms (flukes) rob animals of blood and
      nutrients, leading to

i. Poor growth
ii. Infertility
iii. Poor immune status
iv. Death



C.    HOW WORMS LIVE




Stage 1. Eggs hatch in the grass and larvae come out, grow and change


                                  4
1.    Roundworms
      Found is esophagus,
      stomach, intestine lungs
      etc.
Stage 2: Animal eats the larvae
with grass


Stage 3: The larvae enter the body,
change to adult worms and
produce eggs.




Stage 4: Adult worms in the
stomach or intestine produce eggs




Stage 5: Eggs drop to the ground
in faeces




                                   5
D.      GENERAL RULES OF HYGIENE IN WORK CONTROL
        For a livestock enterprise to maximize its output, it is necessary
that the animals should be in good health. The measures to be taken
falls into two classes. First is a good guidelines for effective animal
Husbandry (feeding, drinking, housing) that will ensure a satisfactory
rate of reproduction and normal growth of a healthy stock that will
produce at an acceptance economic yield. The second is to routinely
protect the animal from the action of parasite burden through regular
pest control deworming exercises. High level of hygiene are required
in the following areas.

1.      Drinking hygiene
       Every herdsman brings his herd to common watering place.
       Shallow pools which form around watering places are
       favorable environments for the appearance of infective forms of
       parasites which develops form eggs dropped with the faeces
       from the major or intermediate hosts. It is important therefore to
       avoid the contamination of watering places or water spots.
       Individual herds drinking should prevent pollution of the
       water by excreta.

2.      Hygiene of Rangelands and pasture
       Protection is difficult on open rangelands where the herds have
       unrestricted movements. For close pastures in which animals
       movement can be checked, pasture contamination can be
       avoided by subjecting newly introduce animals to a quantine
       period during which they are given worm treatment.



                                    6
3.       Hygiene of Animal house and pens
     ·   Whatever the type of building or livestock housed you have, its
         cleanliness will ensure success. Excrement should be removed
         regularly and routinely. Uneaten fed should not be left too long
         in the troughs.
     ·   Regular disinfection of the Environment with recommended
         chemicals and spray with residual insecticides are
         indispensable methods of avoiding build up of common worm
         eggs which can become dangerous.
     ·   Professional guideline on the construction and use of farm
         structure according to animal species is also important for
         maximum control on humidy, temperature and cross
         ventilation.

4.       Animal behavior and hygiene
         It is necessary to avoid over stocking which causes the animals
         to be aggressive because of their need to defend their territory
         and access to food. In addition to the inconveniences, there is
         increased risk of transmission of normally common place
         worms and parasites. Also when animals show sickly
         appearance and poor growth they should be removed and
         housed separately. This is primarily for health reasons and also
         for economic reasons too.

E.     HOW TO CONTROL WORMS
       First learn to observe signs of worm burden in a herd. Most
times worm make animals sick and more often than anything else does.
Most worms make animal loss flesh and stop growing. They often
cause diarrhea in several animals in the herd. The rate at which the
problem spread from one animal to another is very rapid too.


                                    7
                         Sign of round worm in




                          Swollen abdomen
               Example of Herd with worm problem

     F. HOW TO CONTROL WORMS WITH LOCAL MEDICINE

1.     Albrizia anthelmitica
       Some people crush the bark of this tree with a stick and soak it in
       cold water. They strain the liquid and give it by mouth to cattle,
       sheep or goat to treat for some worms. Note that modern worm
       medicine are more effective.

2.     Pramnia maxima
       Some people use the fruits of this plant to control worms. They
       crush the fruits and mix them with water. They give the liquid
       by mouth to treat worms. Mordern worm medicine are more
       effective.


                                    8
3.   Veronia Amygdalina
     Some people also use a grab of butter leave weighing
     approximately 117gm pounded in a mortar 100ml of water is
     added and left overnight. The extract is then sieved and used
     for drenching one cow, sheep or goat. Note also that modern
     worm control medicine is more effective.

4.   Kaya senegalensis
     Some farmers take the fresh bark of kaya scenegalensis plant
     and is air dried, grounded into powder and mixed with 1% red
     potash. One palm full of these mixture (71.8gm) is soaked in
     cold water form a suspension, stirred and drenched to an
     animal. Note also that modern worm medicine are more
     effective.

G.   CONTORL OF WORMS WITH WORM MEDICINE
     (ANTHELMINTICS)
           An annual programme aimed at controlling worms in
     farm animals is desirable. This involves the strategic use of
     anthelmintics at the following periods in the year:
     i.    Preventive treatment early in the raining season.
     ii.   Treatment mid season and early dry season to reduce
           pasture contamination
     iii.  Routine treatment in case of chemical outbreaks.

1.   February to June Treatment (Early Raining Season)
     Deworm at this period to prevent the cycling        to worm



                               9
infestation in calves during the early part of the grazing period and
thus reduce subsequent pasture contamination with infective larvae.
The 3-8-13 system (i.e 3 weeks, 8 weeks and 13 week sequence of
deworming practice at this period) prevent cycling of both stomach
and lung worm and the deposition of eggs and larvae on the pasture
for up to 16-17 weeks from the on-set of rains. As a result the
progremme will provide season long control of stomach worms, liver
flukes and lung worms in calves.
2.     July to September Treatment (Mid –Raining season)
       At this time a good worm medicine
       effective in the treatment of round
       worms should be administered. This
       treatment is based on the
       understanding that there is already a
       build up of worm on pasture which
       should be control before it cause
       problem.

3.    October to December (Early Dry seaon)
      Again an effective anthelmintic effective
      in the control of round worms and liver
      fluke should be administered.




                                 10
4.   Routine treatment in cases of clinical infection.
     This is when animals are simply dewormed in response to clinical
     helminthiasis. Clinical signs observed include loss of appetite,
     anemia, coughing, diarrhea etc.

     H.      HOW TO USE DEWORMER (ANTHELMINTICS)
1.   Use drugs that are from reputable sources on animals Be sure that the
     drugs have been kept in good conditions and are used within the expiry
     period specified.
2.   Some of the drugs ae specified only for certain kinds of animal and are
     dangerous for others – so be careful.
3.   Direction of use that come with worm medicine are very important. It
     tells you which animals to use the drug for and at what dose rate.
4.   To treat a group of animals, use the weight of the heaviest animals in
     the same age group. Never use the average weight of the group.
5.   Respect the expected treatment internals for better result.

I.   HOW TO DRENCH AN ANIMAL
     Liquid Medication can be given as drench. You will need a fanta, coke,
     bear bottle or dose syringe. Measure the correct amount of drench.
     Keep Goat, Sheep or Cow head in normal position. Place end of
     syringe or bottle in left side of month on back of tongue slowly pour
     drench into the throat.

J.   HOW TO GIVE AN ANIMAL A BOLUS
     Remove Bolus from container in proper dose, break between two
     paper and dissolve in coke bottle and drench. You can also insert bolus
     in end of balling gun or tube. Hold tube upward to prevent bolus from
     dropping out. Put tube in left side of goat, sheep or cow’s mouth.



                                   11
Push plunger forward forcing bolus into oesophesus. Hold the mouth
closed and stroke through at down until bolus is swallowed.

K.      CHOOSING THE RIGHT WORM MEDICINE FROM
THE MARKET
Animal drug trade in Nigeria is not regulated. Most drugs are easily
available across the counter. This open the way for all sorts of fake
drugs of dubious quality in the Nigerian market. Therefore avoid
choosing drugs whose origin cannot be quaranteed. Such drugs are
often less expensive but of uncertain composition. The efficacy of
such products cannot be quantified and they can be dangerous.
        Fake drugs cannot be recognized easily but preference should
be given to products sold in containers which are difficult to re-use.
Also avoid using products whose packaging or labeling gives rise to
doubts about the genuiness. It is always better to contact your local
veterinarian when in doubt.

L.      AVOID USING UNSUITABLE DRUGS
The choice of a dewormer should take into account the particular
animal to be treated. First identify what worms you want to control.
Once the worms have been identified, the next step is to know what
active agent(s) you want in the drug of choice and what dosage is
appropriate to achieve the best result. It is a fact that not all trade name
with the same active ingredient offer the same spectrum of efficacy.
The wrong choice of formulation may therefore result in poor
protection of the animal
        To choose a product, seek advice first. Care should be take to
select good quality products with easy to understand direction for use.




                                12
M   PREPARATION                     AND          APPLICATION                      OF
DEWOEMERS

1.        First clean pens and environment to prevent reinfection.
2.        Observe the expiry date on the label and follow the direction
          carefully and calculate the dosage per kilogram live weight.
          Don’t use unguided guestimated.
3.        Avoid spillage and wastage and don’t contaminate yourself,
          water or utensils carelessly. Clean up properly after work.
          Dispose off used material properly. Expired drugs should be
          buried.
                        EXAMPLES OF COMMON DEWORMERS
         Drugs           Spectrum             Dosage (mg/kg) liveweight
                                    Cattle             Sheep            Goats
       Albendazole          a,b      5-7.5              5-7.5            5.75
                             c,       10                4.75             4.75
         Flukazole           c        10                 10               10
       Ferbebudizile       a,b,c     5-7.5              5-7.5            5-7.5
        Ivermeitin         a,d,e    0.2-0.5            0.2-0.5          0.2-0.5
        Levamisol           ae        7.5                7.5              7.5
     Lovamisol/Oxy           c       0.25               0.25             0.25
     clozaide (mixed)
       mebendazole         a,b,c       15                 15              15
         Morantel            a        10.5               5.9              5.9
        Nitroxynil           a       10-15              10-15            10-15
       Oxfendazole         a,b,c     4.5-5              4.5-5            4.5-5
      Oxyclozamine           c       4.5-5              4.5-5            4.5-5
         Piperzine          a,f        15                 10              10
      Thiabendazole         a,d        60                160              160
       Thiophanate         a,d,     66-110              44-66            44-66
     Triclabendazole         c         12                 10              10
     NB a=Round worm, b=Tape worm, c=Liverflukes, d=Lungworms e=Stomach
     worms f=Ascanis


                                     13
O.     PRECAUTIONARY MEASURES
i. Don’t use milk for human consumption within 3 days of deworming
       except otherwise advised.
ii. Do not slaughter such animal for human consumption at lease in
       within 2 weeks of treatment.
iii. Overdose or underdose is harmful. This is why it is all w a y s
       good to ask for professional services.

P.       COMMON WORMS OF CATTLE, SHEEP AND
         GOAT
     ·   Cause loss of weight, diarrhea, anemia
     ·   Pot belly, swelling under the jaw
     ·   Some are passed out in stool
     ·   Transmitted though contaminated feed, water or grass.
     ·   Control is by regular de-worming exercises.
2.       Tape worm
     ·   Found in tissue, organs, intestinve etc
     ·   May stay in the body without any sign
     ·   Lambs are mostly affected
     ·   Segments passed out in stool and cysts are found in flesh.
3        Liver flukes
     ·   Affects liver, bileducts, gallbladder, stomach.
     ·   Loss of weight, anemia
     ·   Eggs passed out in faeces
     ·   Death may occur because of live damage
     ·   In Slaughtered animal, a whole liver can be condemned
     ·   To control avoid marshy areas for grazing.
     ·   Kill snails by spraying
     ·   Flukazole and levamisole are fist drug of choice

                                 14
4. Cocciddia
   1. A protazoa that destroy the small intestine
   2. Cause loss of appetite
   3. Diarrhea in calves, lambs and kids
   4. Diarrhea may be bloody and the parasites can be isolated
   5. Control include sanitation, cleaning and drying up wet spots
   6. Amprolium and Ampromix in feed and water are first drugs of choice.

1. Trypanosomes
   a. Parasites found in blood streams
   b. Affect local sheep and cattle
   c. Show no specific symptoms
   d. Control include eradication of testsefly or, trapping and destroying the
      flies.
   e. Berenil is first drug of choice.

References

1.     Bil Forse( ) where there is no Vet. Macmillan press Ltd.
       London and Oxford.

2.     Mowlem, (1992)Alan Goat farming. Farming Press.
       copyright Alan mowlem, 1988, 1992

3.     Pagot, Jean(1993) Animal production in the tropics.
       Published by the Macmillan press Ltd. London and
       Basingstoke, reprinted 1993




                                     15
