     DUCK PRODUCTION
        IN NIGERIA

               Extension Bulletin No. 133

                  Poultry Series No 7


NATIONAL AGRICULTURAL EXTENSION AND RESEARCH LIAISON
                      SERVICES
              AHMADU BELLO UNIVERSITY
                     P.M.B. 1067
                   ZARIA NIGERIA.
                          ACKNOWLEDGMENT
        Published information on duck raising is scarce in Nigeria. In fact, this
is the first Extension Bulletin publication on duck keeping produced by
NAERLS. The burden for this work arose from the need to look inwards and
focus on the neglected, but vital sources of animal protein for household diets.
This bulletin therefore, is intended to provide useful information on the
various aspects of duck production, create awareness and thus motivate
Nigerian poultry farmers to get more involved into duck raising ventures for
eggs, meat and profit.
        My sincere appreciation goes to all the Scientists, Researchers,
Scholars whose work was consulted and all the staff of NAERLS for the
contributions in making this Bulletin a success.

                                 E.I. Ikani
                        Extension Specialist (Poultry).
CONTENTS                                                                       Page
Acknowledgment......................................................             i
Contents....................................................................     ii
Introduction ...........................................................         1
Common Ducks varieties in Nigeria.......................                         3
Duck Raising Systems in Nigeria............................                      7
Integrated Duck-fish-snail Production.....................                       9
Duck Breeding ....................................................               11
Housing and Equipment ...........................................                16
 Feeding ...................................................................     18
.Health Care of Ducks .............................................              23
Duck Carcass Processing and Product Utilization ............... 26
 Duck Marketing ........................................................         28
Duck Production Records ...........................................              29
Summary of Duck Management Practices .....................                       32
Glossary of Words ........................................................       33
Bibliography .................................................................   34




                                                  2
INTRODUCTION
        The domestic ducks are water-fowls. They are raised mainly in
regions of high rainfall, deltas, riverine areas and coastal districts of the
tropics. A number of advanced countries in temperate climates also keep
ducks in commercial quantities.

        In Nigeria, local ducks are raised on free range along side with the
domestic chickens. Even though ducks are hardier and more resistant to
diseases and environmental hazards they are fewer than the chickens due
basically to cultural beliefs which tend to portray ducks as mystique birds.
However, development in research and technology has increasingly
eliminated these cultural barriers and enhanced productivity of the birds.
Nigeria can thus take advantage of the economic and nutritional benefits of
ducks to improve on the short fall in the animal protein supply in family diets.

Importance of Duck Farming

1      Ducks are mini-livestock and raising them does not require elaborate
       houses. They require little space and can be sheltered in simple sheds
       at night and let loose during the day.
2.     Ducks are rarely affected by the common disease problems prevalent
       among chickens.          They are hardier and more resistant to
       environmental hazards, therefore, better as scavenger birds in
       developing countries like Nigeria.

3.     They are comparable in meat qualities to chickens as shown in Table 1
       below:




                                       3
Table1: Meat quantities of duck versus chicken
     Meat Quality          Duck           Local Chicken         Broiler
  Appearance                7.2                8.2                6.5
  Juiciness                 6.8                7.2                8.7
  Tenderness                6.3                5.6                8.5
  Flavor                    8.2                8.8                6.9
  Overall*                  9.0                9.5                7.1
Source: Oluyemi and Ologhobo (1997)
4.    Ducks are able to digest fibre and protein food relatively more
      efficiently than chickens. This is an advantage considering recent
      emphasis on non-conventional feedstuffs to bring down cost of feed-
      inputs in the poultry Industry.
5.    Integrated farming system is very feasible with duck raising e.g.
      Duck-fish-snail farming and Duck-swampy rice production.
6.    Duck keeping requires little labour since their eggs are laid at night or
      early in the morning. The eggs can be collected in the morning before
      leaving the ducks loose on free- range during the day.
7.    Profitable small backyard poultry project is more feasible with ducks
      than with chickens, because ducks have longer productive (egg laying)
      period . Generally, the farmer needs only to replace the laying flock
      twice every three years. While for optimum egg production, chickens
      require stock replacement after every one season of lay

COMMON DUCK VARIETIES IN NIGERIA.
        There are many duck breeds raised in countries of the world, kept both
for ornamental and domestic reasons. But the small farmer is mainly
concerned with getting meat and eggs from his ducks. The most popular
varieties of ducks found common in Nigeria, include:
        1.      The Muscovy Duck
The Muscovy duck is the most popular variety in Nigeria. The duck is
believed to have originated in Central America.


                                      4
Due to the fact that duck raising is still not well developed in this country, the
variety is most commonly kept on free-range and at backyard level. The
plumage could be black, white or a combination of both colours. Muscovy
may be easily recognised by the fleshy out growths, red in colour, found round
the eyes and beaks. See figure.1 below..




                             Figure. 1 Muscovy duck

        Muscovy duck is popular due to the high adaptation to scavenging
conditions. They are excellent mothers and good egg sitters. Muscovy ducks
are able to hatch and care for an average of 30 ducklings (young ducks)
annually per bird. The egg weighs between 55-60gm each
        Under the scavenging conditions the duck can lay between 60-80 eggs
per year and about 100-125 per bird per year on modern farms. As scavengers,
the adult female weighs 1.5kg while the male weighs 2.2.kg. The Muscovy is
recommended for the Nigerian poultry farmers purely for its readiness to hatch
not only its own eggs but also any other egg set under it. The muscovy duck
makes a good, if rather gamey, table bird. However, they are great fliers and it
may be necessary to clip their wings. They are found numerous in the
Southern States along the coastal part of Nigeria. The qualities of the
Muscovy duck makes it easy to be the water fowl of choice for Nigerian
poultry farmers and it is recommended..

                                        5
2      The Campbell
       This variety is also found on some modern and Government/Research
       farms in Nigerian. The Campbell (fig 2) is the most popular egg type
       variety in most parts of the world. The duck is of the average size and
       more compact in posture than the Muscovy.




                      Figure.2 The Campbell duck

        Eggs from Campbell duck are fairly large, thick shelled and weigh
about 60-70gm each. The ducks are not valued for their meat. The matured
male bird weighs less than 2kg and the female about 1kg on free range.
Campbell is known to produce up to 300 eggs a year per bird if properly fed
and housed on modern farms. The appearance of the bird is AKhaki@Coloured
and therefore, the name Khaki Campbell duck.

3      Other Activities
       Other varieties not popular in Nigeria but are found common in other
       parts of the world include:
S      Pekin: This Originated from China and now the premier table duck in
       North America and Australia. The duck is completely white and of the
       meat-type with very rapid growth. The male weighs 4kg while the
       female 3.5kg on modern farms.


                                     6
S   Aylesbury - This variety dominated the table duck trade in Britain for
    years, until recently when it was ousted by the Welsh Harlequin duck
    and later by strains of pekin. Aylesbury duck can lay up to 100 eggs a
    year. It is a snow-white, heavy bird weighing up to 4.5kg when fully
    matured.
S   Indian Runner: The breed Originated from Malaya and was
    introduced to Britain as egg type duck. It was one of the most widely
    kept before being ousted by Khaki Campbell. The bird can lay an
    average of 180 eggs a year and are easily recognised by their
    characteristic upright stance. See figure 3a, b & c )




                        Figure. 3a Pekin duck




                      Figure 3b Aylesbury


                                  7
                          Figure. 3c Indian Runner


DUCK RAISING SYSTEMS IN NIGERIA
The common systems of duck husbandry in Nigeria are:
Scavenging (Free-range) System
        The scavenging system of duck production is the predominant form
of duck husbandry in developing countries. It is the traditional method of
rearing which accounts for the majority of duck raised. Under this system,
flocks comprise of 5 to 20 ducks which are allowed to free- range over part of
the village area. The ducks return to home yard in the evenings of their own
accord. The system is cheap as it requires little investment and requires
minimum management No special housing other than for night shelter is
required and there is minimum disease control. Supplementary feed such as
kitchen wastes, by products (e.g. rice bran), fish, water snails, etc are usually
supplied, to the scavenger ducks (fig 4).




                                        8
                        Figure 4: Free Rang Ducks

        This method of providing supplementary feeding makes the ducks
come hack home daily to the farmer. The local breed of ducks predominate
the scavenging system of production. However, the disadvantages of this
system are numerous. Mortality is high due to toxins from decaying flesh or
insecticides and snakes Productivity is low due to uncontrolled breeding and
erratic supply of food. In dry areas, lack of water becomes a serious problem
to duck production. The free-range system of duck husbandry is of major
interest in developing countries like Nigeria, not only as an important
production system of the moment but because they provide an appropriate
context in which to evaluate the potential of the local breeds. Other systems
which are used in raising ducks include:

Semi-enclosed.
From the third week ducklings can be released to have access to grasses, to
limit the fouling of the enclosures and avoid formation of mud.
        Ducks can easily be led in flocks and this practice is in common use in
the rice growing regions of the world, particularly in the              South


                                      9
       East Asia. The system entails allowing ducks to forage during the day
time and are normally housed to lay eggs at night.

The Straw Yards
        This system of production has much advantage to recommend it,
particularly for fattening table ducks which do not need access to water for
swimming. A house opens into an area which is fenced off, and this is kept
covered with a layer of clean, dry straw. It is advisable to have planks along
the bottom of the netting, to stop the straw spilling out beyond the run.
        The system naturally depends on a cheap source of straw, which is
regularly added as the existing straw becomes spoiled. The whole lot is
periodically removable excellent source of compost. See figure 5




                    Figure. 5: Duck Straw Yard
Raising Ducks indoors (Intensive)
This is a common practice in commercial (modern) duck production in
advanced countries. The floor of the rearing house is partly covered with litter
and partly with wooden slats or wire mesh. The litter is renewed daily which
makes a considerable work and expense for the farmer. The density of the
ducks should not exceed 6-8 per square meter.

                                      10
Integrated Duck-Fish-Snail Production
This involves the building of a duck house on the side and extending over the
water of the fish-snail pond (fig 6). The duck house could be built before or
after letting water into the pond. In this integrated farming, the ducks make
use of the pond water surface and the adequate food found in the shallow part
of the pond. The open pond serves as rearing surface for ducks while their
excreta could be spread by wave action into the body of water.
The fish and the snail thrive on the droppings of ducks. The advantage of
duck excreta is that it has high nitrogenous, phosphorus and organic
compounds which are suitable for primary production in ponds. Ducks also
control aquatic vegetation by digging the bottom of shallow water and
consuming the aquatic vegetables. The digging action also helps in stirring up
nutrients concealed in mud thereby releasing them and increasing primary
productivity. Food distributed to fish could also serve the ducks and the
unconsumed ones will obviously sink into the bottom of the pond. Ducks also
feed on the snails (fig 6) resulting in a food chain as shown in Fig 6b below:




                          Fig 6: Duck fish Snail Farm
        About 25kg of duck droppings will be needed for each kilogram of
fish-flesh. One duck can produce about 72kg of droppings in a year. Therefore,
500 ducks kept in one hectare pond will produce 36 tonnes of manure in a year
which is sufficient to yield 1400kg of fish.


                                     11
For a pond area of 50sqm about 12-15 ducks are sufficient to feed the
fish/snail in the pond. The duck house for this number of ducks could be made
of a floor with an area of 4sqm which should be made of wooden slats.

DUCK BREEDING
i.      Selection of Breeding stock:
Selection of breeding stock is one of the first decisions to be made in any
breeding programme. The selection of ducks for breeding purposes should be
done as early as the 8th week and again at the 4th and 5th months before
placing the breeders in the breeding pens. By the 5th month all healthy ducks
should show well developed bodies. Selection criteria usually include: body
size, posture, feather, colour, bill shape and also the drakes should be the same
age as the females or even a month older. They should be raised separately
from the females and put together only when they are ready for matmg.
Stock Selection: Buy breeding stock from reliable duck raisers in your
locality. It is adviceable to start with day-old ducklings. But be sure to buy
those birds which have the following characteristics:
             a.      Steady Legs
             b.      Alert eyes
             c.      Healthy looking down feathers
             d.      No physical defects
Do not buy ducklings which seem to be “sleepy.” If the requirement for
ducklings is for egg production, try to purchase from a farmer who has good
egg production record from his flocks.

ii.    Sexing Ducklings
The act of separating males from females is called sexing or ducklings, this
should be done right after you get them from the seller. Male ducklings, unlike
day-old chickens possess a well developed copulate organ (penis). Day old
ducklings can be sexed by the so called Japanese or vent method.


                                       12
This is easily done by carefully holding the duckling gently but firmly, so as to
expose the vent. With the finger and thumb of the other hand, push back gently
on either side, so that the vent is extended and opened. In a male bird, the
penis will be seen as a small organ (which looks like a point of a ball
pen) attached to the inside top of the event. See illustration as shown in
Fig 7 below.



                                        Male



                        a




                                       Female




                                                Fig a, b, , & D Duck sexking
                        b

                             Figure 7: Duck sexing
iii. Mating Ducks
Local duck raisers generally allow one male to every six laying ducks. With
this ratio, a high percentage of fertility is obtained in the eggs produced.
Experiment has reported that the more laying ducks are exposed to drakes
beyond ten, the lower the fertility of the eggs obtained. Eggs produced up to
the forth day after the removal of the drakes from the breeding pens may be
considered fertile to a profitable degree. The ratio of male to females depends
on the purpose of keeping ducks and the availability of the males. However,
farmers commonly keep one drake to about 10-12 females, in commercial
duck production. Ducks will mate both on land and in water usually after the
head bob bing or nodding.


                                       13
Iv. Egg Production and Hatching
       Ducks lay eggs at night and early in the morning. It is therefore,
       advisable to gather the eggs immediately after releasing the layers for
       early morning feeding. The ducks that are still laying should be
       allowed to continue which could be collected later.
       Modem ducks of egg laying strains can produce as many eggs as
       productive laying hen, giving flock average in excess of 270 eggs per
       year. They start to lay at about 18 weeks of age. The local breeds can
       only produce about 60-80 eggs per bird per year. At the backyard
       farms local materials such as empty cartons could be provided as egg
       nests. Such nest should be placed in secluded place to avoid
       disturbance to the laying duck.
       Under the :tree range system of production the reproductive cycle of
       duck comprises of 3 phases:
       a. Laying phase: 15 days
           b.     Incubation phase 28-30 days
           c.     Brooding phase 60.65 days

Duck Egg Hatching
      Egg hatching at the backyard level is by the use of mother duck or
      could be hatched under broody hens. However, for commercial
      hatching of fertile eggs the farmer must be sure the eggs come :trom
      mated birds, and to select those eggs that are far from defects. Do not
      set eggs with shells that are cracked, thin porous or dirty. Thin, porous
      eggs or cracked shells can be detected by inspection or by listening to
      the sound emitted when the egg is gently tapped with the finger. A
      distinct resonant sound is heard from good shells, a dull and hollow
      sound is heard from defective shells which seldom hatch. They are
      usually not :tree :trom
      - bacterial or fungal infection which may contaminate other good
      eggs. The incubation period for duck egg is about 28 days.


                                      14
BROODING DUCKLINGS
       Brooding is the process of providing ducklings with outside heat
and intensive care to assist them in maintaining their body temperature and
healthy growth.
       The most critical period in the life of duckling is the first 3 weeks.
During this time, any slight disturbance would cause them to stampede
around in a comer resulting in the death of the weaker ones. h is therefore,
important to approach them wi1h extra care during brooding. There are two
methods of brooding;

Natural Brooding
     This is the oldest and traditional method where the mother duck or
Muscovy duck are used to furnish from their bodies the additional heat
needed by the ducklings this method is rarely used in the commercial sale
production and it is most practical for the backyard duck producer. (Figure 8)




                          Fig. 8: Natural Brooding


Artificial Brooding
       This is the practice in commercial duck farms where brooding of



                                     15
        ducklings is done with out the mother duck or Muscovy duck
Artificial brooder are used instead. The egg type ducks like the khaki
Campbell and the Indian Runner are non sitters and poormothers,1hus it is
necessary for the ducklings to be brooded artificially. While a Muscovy duck
can brood at most only about 15 ducklings, artificial brooders can be used for
hundreds of ducklings at a time. Today, there are many types of artificial
brooders. They vary depending on design, fuel used to supply heat and size.
Some brooders can accommodate 50 ducklings while o1hers can brood as
many as several thousands at a time (fig 9 a & b)




           Fig 9a: Artificial brooding Fig 9b Artificial brooding
                      (Kerosine Lamp) (Electric bulb)

        A simple - shed type house can be used as brooder house. The house
should protect the ducklings from predators. Also proper ventilation is
essential in brooding, however, this does not mean exposing ducklings to
rains and strong winds.
        When brooding ducklings, the temperature should be 34°c in the first
week,21 °c in the second week 16°c in the third week and 14°c in the
succeeding weeks. The behaviours of the ducklings is a good indicator of
whether the brooding temperature is right. They huddle close together when
the temperature is low and scatter or spread out when it is too hot. Adequate
space should be provided in the brooder for this behaviour as in table 2 below.


                                      16
Table 2 Recommended minimum floor spaced in the brooder

Age (weeks)                         Floor space/bird (Cm )  2




 Day-old one                                     0.03
      1-2                                        0.05
      2-3                                        0.07
      3-4                                        0.09

DUCK BOUSING AND EQUIPMENTS
         Duck like any other form of livestock that are kept for production will
only give its best if it is adequately sheltered. During resting time the duck
needs a dry, sheltered resting place like any other bird. Ducks do not like
strong wind, nor can they cope with too much hot sun. A sheltered, shady
place is therefore necessary. The basic housing requirements are thus
protection against wind, rain and sun; adequate ventilation and a dry bed.
         The dimensions of the house itself will depend on how many ducks
are to be housed. A house which is O.75cm high will serve since perches are
not needed. The roof itself will need to slope backwards away from the front,
and to have an overhang of at least O.6m. The floor area should provide a
minimum of O.15sqm for each bird. Rammed earth floors are suitable, but
must be rat-proof The floors should be covered with a thick layer of straw or
wood shavings which must be clean, dry and hygienic. As much as possible
readily available local materials should be used for duck housing, as
illustrated in fig. 10 .
         The door into the duck house should be ofO.6m wide to allow for the
traffic jam that usually ensues when the ducks are let out in the mornings,
especially that ducks are vulnerable to leg injuries. Windows also should be
high enough to prevent ducks from seeing outside since sudden movements
or disturbance can cause them to panic and trample on each other. Adequate
ventilation should be ensured in the duck house while the birds must not be
exposed to droughts.


                                      17
       Ducks should be housed in groups based on age to facilitate
management and to avoid the quarrels common among ducks of different
ages. Old ducks tend to bully out young ones from the feeding troughs.

Equipment
      The following items of equipment are required in rearing ducks:
Egg Nests: Naturally ducks make temporary egg nests in the litter, however,
      for clean eggs, simple communal nests should be provided along the
      wall. This is particularly important for Mus-covy ducks
Waterers      The standard for watering troughs are nearly the same as those
      for chickens. It is better to place watering troughs above wire flooring
      to prevent the floor becoming wet. It is important that waer be made
      available at all times. Waterers should be near the feeders as the ducks
      have the habit of gulping the feed and running to the waterers to wash
      the feed diwn their crop.

Feeding Troughs:
There are different kinds of feeders. Select the one that will best suit your
purpose. The design should be adopted to the housing used. The
construction should avoid wastage of feed.




                     Fig 10.: Duck House/Equipment


                                      18
FEEDS AND FEEDING
In duck raising, feeding is very important. Under the free-range system, birds
are reared with minimal attention by the farmer with respect to what the ducks
eat. The scavenging ducks feed on grasses, seeds, insects and have access to
pond which provide them with natural food in the form of slung water fleas
etc. As a general rule the ducks benefit better than the chickens from a
relatively energy-poor and cellulose-rich diet. Ducks on free-range are able to
balance their nutrients intake, since they are not restricted in movement. But
under confinement, the farmer must provide the birds with balance feed for
enhanced production. The constituents offeeds that are needed by ducks are
called nutrients. These consists of water, carbohydrates, protein, minerals and
vitamins. Table 3 below provides information about feedstuffs that can
furnish the nutrients mentioned above.


Nutrient Requirement.
         The ducks at various stages of growth require specific nutrient levels
in their diets.




                                     19
20
Nutrients                Growth       Reproduction
                         0-4 Weeks    Above 4 Weeks        Laying
ME(KCaJ/kg)              2800         2800                 2700
Crode Protein %          19.0         17.0                 15.0
Lysine                   1.0          0.8                  0.65
Methionine %             0.5          0.45                 0.35
Methionine + Cystine %   0.9          0.8                  0.6
Calcium                  0.8          0.9                  2.5
Pbosphoms                0.4          0.45                 0.5

        Growth is very rapid in the duck within the first weeks of its life and
feed conversion ratios are low. Beyond this age, feed consumption and feed
conversion ratios increase rapidly.
        Ducks eat more than chickens and, depending on its size, an adult
duck will consume between 170-200gm of feed a day. It is better to feed
ducks twice a day than to give them all the feed at the same time. The most
convenient times are when they are let out of the house in the morning hours
and when they come back home in the evening for night shelter. One way to
estimate whether the ducks are getting enough is to observe if there is any
feed left over after twenty minutes of feeding. If there is, then you are
probably providing too much. Ducks have the tendency to transfer feed to
their waterers, which may help them to swallow in the case of mash feed. This
can lead to wastage and to ensure prevention, place the feeders and waters
some 60 -70cm apart.




                                      21
        Ducklings from day-old can be fed with moistened cracked maize or
guinea com 4 to 5 times in a day for 3 weeks. Starting from the 5th day include
ground soyabean cake or groundnut cake in the diet. Increase the quantity of
this diet as the ducklings grow older. Be sure to provide clean water in their
troughs daily. Commercial feed concentrate are too expensive and often time
not available and therefore, not recommended for the backyard duck farmers.
However, the following feed formular from available local ingredients are
suggested (Table 5 ) as multi-purpose duck diets.

Table 5: Suggested All-Purpose Duck Rations.
   Ingredients                      Growers             Layers
                                    Ration              Ration
   Coarsely Ground Maize/Guinea Com 30                  25
   Soyabean Cake/GNC                22                  20
   Rice Bran/Maize Offal            40                  45
   Greens                           1.5                 3.0
   Blood Meal                       3.0                 2.0
   Bone Meal                        3.0                 2.5
   Limestone                            -               2.0
   Salt                                 0.5             0.5
                                        100             100

HEALTH CARE OF DUCKS
         It is always better to prevent a disease than to cure it. This principle
holds also for ducks . Generally speaking, ducks raised in small numbers and
in isolation, are relatively resistant and hardy to the common poultry diseases.
But where large numbers of ducks are concentrated, particularly under
intensive system, diseases could be a serious problem. Lack of proper
management and nutritional inadequacy are usually the causes.
Health Signs to Watch.



                                       22
         A healthy duck is normally alert, curious, interested in its food and with
an upright stance. Any duck standing in isolation, drooping position or
huddled up into its feathers should be culled from the flock without delay.
Always attend to the healthy ducks before the sick ones to prevent disease
transfer, during daily routine management activities.
         Some of the common diseases and health problems of ducks in Nigeria
are as highlighted below:


1.      Botulism (Limber Neck)
        This is a disease condition in ducks where the birds lose control of their
        neck muscles. It is caused by bacteria found in decaying organic
        matters. It is more common in ducks and other water fowls, than in
        other poultry birds because of their tendency to dabble in mud and dirty
        water. Farmers are advised to remove decaying vegetation and animal
        carcass from the vicinity of duck and to maintain a high standard of
        sanitation.
2.      Salmonellosis
         This is a destructive disease of ducklings also called keel disease. It is
        caused by bacteria - Salmonella spp. Affected ducklings collapse
        suddenly and also, causes death of embryo during incubation. Strict
        sanitary measures should be observed during egg laying, incubation
        and hatching. Antibacterial agents can help to prevent mortality of
        sucklings.
3.      Duck Virus Hepatitis
        This is a highly contagious and fatal viral disease of ducklings. The
        first indication is when their movements are seen to be uneven and
        wobbly. They then quickly succumb and die. There is no cure, but
        immunization of breeder ducks with preventive vaccine is advised.




                                        23
     This is a condition in ducks where the wings hang down lower than
     normal in its resting position fig 10. It occurs as a result of muscular
     weakness. Slipped wing is a variation of the same condition, where
     the flight feathers stick out at right angles. Both conditions are
     harmless and do not appear to cause any distress.




               Dropping wing




5.   Parasites
     Ducks are water fowls, as a result external parasites such as lice, mites
     and ticks which burrow into the skin of most domestic birds and suck
     blood are not serious problems. However, internal parasites such as
     round worms, tape worms, thread worms are common and could pose
     serious problem to human who consume such infested duck meat. The
     affected ducks loose weight, loose appetite and are listless: They
     become infested by eating up eggs of the parasites from human feces,
     contaminated water and feed .


                                    24
       should purchased from local veterinary store for administration. Also,
       prevent the ducks from contaminated water and feeds.

DUCK CARCASS PROCESSING AND PRODUCT UTILIZATION
    Killing:    To slaughter ducks, it is recommended that all those
    earmarked for killing should be starved of feed for 24 hours. This is to
    ensure the ease of cleaning during evisceration. The duck is
    slaughtered by severing the jugular vein and cutting it just below the
    hind brain at the throat. Cutting to kill should be immediately and
    should cause no excessive suffering to the fowl as shown in figure 12
    below:.




                       Figure. 12 Slaughtering Ducks

Feather Plucking.
       Feather removal (Plucking) is more difficult with the duck than with
chickens and should be done immediately after killing before the carcass gets
cold. An easy way to quickly remove feathers is by the method of dry plucking
the wings and tail, then the carcass is dipped into hot water (60 c) to penetrate
                                                                 o




through the body, for about 6-10 minutes. The feathers are then easily
removed by scalding.



                                       25
Removing the gut:
        Evisceration or removal of the gut contents in duck is done after
slaughtering and plucking. This is done by cutting open the neck muscles
close to the body leaving a flap of skin to close the hole. Through this hole,
the crop is removed along with gizzard, lungs, heart and liver through the rear
of the carcass. The intestine can then be cut out off the body.
Meat:
        After evisceration of duck carcass, the next stage is cutting of the
carcass into meat pieces for household use. This is done by first removing the
leg sinews and drawing them out from the legs. Then cut out the legs off from
below the knee joint. Also the wings and head are removed from the body.
The carcass can then be pieced into standard meat cuts as shown in Figure 13
below:




                                    Fig 13 Duck Carcass Cuts
         These standard cuts can further be pieced in smaller sizes according to
the needs of the family. These meat pieces can then be made used of into many
Nigerian dishes of high delicacies by frying, roasting and boiling. Duck meat
is very nutritious and highly cherished in stews, soup, etc.
Use of Duck Eggs
         Eggs from ducks can be used for all the things that hen=s eggs would
normally be used for. The taste does not differ from that of the noticed,


                                      26
        recommended anthelmintics hen=s eggs, but the egg white tends to be
        more elastic. This is the reason why a number of people prefer to keep
        duck eggs for cooking, rather than to eat them as they are.

DUCK MARKETING
        Selling of ducks is not an organized market in Nigeria. The birds are
commonly sold at the open markets in villages and along major streets in
Urban Centers by hawkers (figure14). The small Unit price of duck makes
acquisition by buying from the open marketing most popular and easiest.




                      Figure 14 Roadside sales of ducks
        The birds are usually sold along with other mini livestock like local
chickens, guinea fowls, pigeons, rabbits etc. in wicker basket cages and at
strategic road junctions to get the attention of passer-by. Pricing is by bargain,
and if compromise is reached transaction is made.
        Marketing trend is such that middle-men collect ducks from farmers at
the farm-gates, sell to the retailer and from there to the consumers. The
farmers and consumers therefore, are at the mercy of these middle-men.
Farmers sell their ducks when there is urgent need for peti-cash for family use.



                                       27
       For instance, to pay children school fees, medical expenses, purchase
of farm-inputs at the on-set of raining season etc. The middle-men take
advantage of this situation to buy the ducks at give away prices to the
disadvantage of the farmers. This calls for the need to get the farmers into
functional cooperative groups and by that, harness the effort of these farmers
for improved production and organized duck marketing.

DUCK PRODUCTION RECORDS
       Record keeping is essential in duck production at whatever scale of
operation. Since duck farming in Nigeria is at the small scale level, record
keeping format should be as simple as possible. It should however carry
information on improved management practices and cost-benefit assessment
record. Examples of such records are shown below in table 6:

Table:6 Duck Farm Record Keeping
       Duck production record:
       Total Number of Duck on Farm ............................................
       Number of drakes ................................................................
       Number of ducks....................................................................
       Number of ducklings ..............................................................
       Total number of eggs laid .......................................................
       Number of eggs per clutch......................................................
       Number of clutches per year ...................................................
       Incubation date.......................................................................
       Hatching date ........................................................................
       Number of ducklings hatched .................................................
       Mortality ................................................................................
       Health Record
       Vaccination ............................................................................
       De-worming date .....................................................................
       Medication date ............................. type ................................


                                                    28
       Expenditure Record
       1.    Cost of foundation stock
       2.    Shelter .................................................
       3.    Equipment............................................
       4.    Feed cost .............................................
       5.    Medication ..........................................
       6.    Labour cost ..........................................
       7.    Total...................................................
       Income:
       1.    Sales of live ducks.............................
       2.    Sales of eggs.....................................
       3.    Manure Sales ...................................
            Total ...............................................

          SUMMARY OF DUCK MANAGEMENT PRACTICES
I.       Buy your foundation stock from reliable duck farmers, in the locality.
II.      The Muscovy ducks are recommended for the small scale farmer who
     practices semi-intensive production system.
III.     Do provide shelter for your ducks especially for night rest, egg
     incubation and brooding.
IV.      Give adequate balance diet to ducks and ensure provision of clean
     water along with feeding.
V.       Young ducks are very nervous during the first 3 weeks. Avoid any
     form of disturbance, as it can cause them to stampede.
VI.      Keep one male to 6 females for breeding purposes.
VII. Ducklings should be prevented from chilling rains and cold until they
     are about 4 weeks old.
VIII. Keep a very clean environment in duck house and avoid decaying
     bodies around the environment.
IX.      Keep good duck production records for easy assessment of duck farm
     operations.


                                               29
                 GLOSSARY OF WORDS
Breeding:          The mating of male and female in order to produce
                   offspring
Brooding:          Rearing of ducklings either by a sitting duck or mother
                   hen or by artificial heat.
Drake:             A male adult duck
Duck:              The female matured duck-hen
Duckling:          A young duck
Fowl:              A collective term applying to ducks, chickens and other
                   poultry species.
Hatch:             To bring forth young from an egg or eggs.
Incubation:        The process of subjecting selected eggs from mated
                   flocks to proper condition outside the birds body for the
                   embryo to develop and hatch into ducklings.
Integrate:         To bring (parts) into whole
Sexual Maturity:   The time when the first egg was laid.




                                    30
                            BIBLIOGRAPHY

Anthony .J.S. (1990). The Tropical Agriculturist Poultry - Pub. CTA
        Macmillian.
Ikani, I.E. (1992). Profitable backyard duck production. New Nigeria
        Newspaper, Friday Nov. 27 1992 pg 20
Katie, T. and Alistair. F. (1986). The complete book of raising livestock and
        poultry. A self sufficiency guide (Nig. Edition pub. by Unit Services
        Ltd.
MBRLC (1988). How to raise Ducks for food and profit. How to series No. 5;
        Kinuskusan, Bansalan, Bavao del. Sur. 8005 Philippines.
Obinne, J.I., Mmereole, FCU and Emegha, I.O. (2000). An assessment of
        Duck production in Anambra State. Proc. Of 4 annual conf. Of
                                                           th




        ASAN, held 14-16 Sept. 1999 IITA Conf. Center Ibadan. Nig pg 3 - 5.
Oniye, S.J. and Awelewa, J. (1991). Prospects of integrating fish culture into
        some agricultural production. Paper presentation at National
        Livestock and Vet. Conf. held at NAERLS ABU Zaria August 1991.
Ralph Say, R (1987). Manual of poultry Production in the Tropics CAB
        International/CTA Publication.




                                     31
