    ECONOMICS OF AQUACULTURE PRODUCTION




                Extension Bulletin No 107



                  Fisheries Series No. 5




                        Published by




National Agricultural Extension and Research Liaison Services
                  Ahmadu Bello University
                           Zaria.




                           2000
                        ACKNOWLEDGEMENT

The information in this bulletin were pooled together to assist
prospective and practicing fish farmers to understand the economics
and cost analysis of aquaculture enterprise This is to serve as stimulus
for profitable fish culture business. All sources of information duly cited
in the bibliography are acknowledged. The management of NAERLS
funds the publication, while the NAERLS Publication Review
Committee did a painstaking job in transforming this bulletin to simple
language for easier understanding by readers- Also worth mentioning is
the NAERLS Publication and Publicity Program staff who worked
tirelessly to edit this work. All the aforementioned are highly
acknowledged.



                   Amos T. T. and Bolorunduro P.I
                                TABLE OF CONTENT

Acknowledgement............................................................... 2
1.0 Introduction................................................................. 3
2.0 Aquaculture Practices................................................. 4
3.0 Commonly Cultured Fish Species................................ 4
4. 0 Risk Management in Aquaculture................................ 9
5.0 Factors to Consider for Profitable Enterprise............... 11
6.0 Record Keeping.......................................................... 14
7.0 Cost Components to Consider..................................... 17
8.0 Farm Business Analysis.............................................. 20
9.0 Investment Analysis Method....................................... 21
10.0 Conclusion.................................................................. 23
Bibliography......................................................................... 29




                                                2
1.0 INTRODUCTION

      Aquaculture (Fish Farming) is the art and science of controlled
      rearing of fish in ponds, farms and in some instances natural water
      bodies from hatchlings (freshly hatched” fishes) to matured size.
      Unlike fish that grow in natural water bodies without human
      interference, in aquaculture, feeding, fertilization, stocking
      combination, reproduction and harvesting are controlled.

  Aquaculture is a relatively new practice in Nigeria. For this reason it
  is important for potential and practicing fish farmers to know some
  basic necessities of its management and economics in order to
  boost the returns of their efforts. Like any economic activity in life,
  balancing investment cost and returns in favour of farmers are
  important in aquaculture. It is always useful for fish farmers to know
  the profitability of fish culture in order to guide their decision making.
  This bulletin is put together to enlighten both practicing and
  prospective fish farmers on how to make profitable investment in
  fish farming The major cost components, investment analysis and
  profitability calculations are explained in simple language as much
  as possible.

2.0     AQUACULTURE PRACTICES

      A wide range of aquaculture practices exists. Aquaculture involves
      the controlled culture of fin-fish and other aquatic animals like frogs,
      lobster, oyster and Cray fish (Macrobracium). This could be done
      based on different criteria.




                                       3
2.1 Types of Fish Ponds
Fish ponds can be classified using the following criteria
         a. Construction design
         b. Level of management input
         c. Fish culture practices
         d      Scale of production

2.1.1 Construction Design
I.   Earthen ponds: These are constructed by digging soil in a
     carefully selected site that is good enough to retain water for fish
     culture, Where the soil structure is weak to retain adequate water,
     dug out earthen ponds can be reinforced with concrete to make it
     suitable for fish culture. (Figure 1)

2     Concrete: These are ponds constructed with concrete.
      They are usually above the ground surface with concrete walls•
      Concrete ponds are used to raise fish in places the soil is porous
      or very sandy, at house backyards or where land scarcity exist. In
      general, concrete ponds are more expensive to construct and
      maintain than earth ponds. Earthen ponds are known to be more
      productive in terms of fish yield and are therefore more profitable.




                          Figure 1. Earthen Ponds.

                                    4
                   Figure 2. Concrete Ponds

3    Barrage ponds: These are ponds constructed by building a
     wall across slow running streams in low valleys. The wall
     ensures enough water retention for fish growth
.
4    Diversion Pond: These are ponds created by water diverted
     from a river/stream through a channel. Such a pond is also
     known as a relief pond.

5    Rosary Pond: When ponds are built in a string and each drains
     into the other and are all managed as a single unit due to their
     inter connection, they are called rosary system ponds.

6.   Parallel ponds: These are ponds located In the same area with
     each having its own inlet and outlet. Various pond designs listed
     above have peculiar cost implications.

                                 5
2.1.2 Level of Management Input
         Depending on the level of management inputs (especially in
feeding, fertilization and liming), pond culture systems can be
classified as extensive, semi-intensive or i n t e n s i v e . R e t u r n s o n
investment for each other differ depending on the level of input.
1.      Extensive Culture System: When food base of a pond is
        exclusively dependent on nature without supplementation
        (either by feeds or fertilizer) the culture system is an extensive
        one. Extensive culture attracts less cost, but are often less
        productive and less profitable.
2.      Semi-Intensive Culture System: In this system,
        there is occasional supplementary feed addition
        and natural food supply is augmented with manure. This attracts
        more cost, but better productivity and profit are assured
        compared with the extensive culture system.
3.      Intensive Culture System: This system demands the highest
        level of management input. Protein rich feeds are intensively
        applied following appropriate recommended rates. The ponds
        are occasionally disinfected against para site and diseases.
        Fish grow very fast when intensively managed and grow least in
        extensive management. Intensive culture system requires high
        expertise. It also demands high level of supervision. Investment
        cost is comparatively higher but commensurate higher
        productivity and profit are certain.




                                       6
2.1.3 Fish Culture Practices
         Culture practices can be classified as monoculture,
polyculture or Integrated.

     1.    Monoculture: This is the practice of culturing only
           one species of fish in one or more pond units. Un
           der monoculture; the farmer may grow for example
           only Tilapia or Clarias in the pond. One disadvan
           tage of this practice is that the farmer will only know
           more about the management of that fish than other
           species that can be cultured. However, the pur
           pose of culture determines the investment cost.
           Growing one type of fish could limit the maximum
           exploitation of natural and supplementary food in
           the pond, thereby affecting pond optimal utiliza
           tion.

   2.     Polyculture: This is the practice of culturing more than one
          species of fish in the same pond e.g. Clarias and Tilapia.
          Fish yield under polyculture can be high because food
          items in the pond are properly utilized since the different
          fish species exploit food at different levels. Well managed
          ponds under polyculture can he highly profitable since food
          utilization is maximized and less risk of project failure is
          assured.

   3.     Integrated Culture: This involves rearing fish with other
          animals or vegetable gardening. Integration of fish culture
          with livestock/gardens can maximize production space
          and productivity. Understanding the know-how of
          managing such integration is important to a farmer in order
          to maximize profitability of this culture integration.
                                 7
2.1.4 Scale of Production
       1. Homested/Backyard Ponds. This is a fishpond that is
       managed to augment family protein intake. The size of such a
       pond could vary according to land space available- e.g. from
       25m to l00m . Such ponds can be homestead/backyard or
              2        2




       located in farm.

      2. Commercial Fish Ponds/Farms: This usually has an area of
         land not less than half a hectare under culture (for earthen
         ponds). Such a farm will demand more attention from the fish
         farmer, since income generation is the rnajor purpose behind
         its establishment A large capital base is also required for
         commercial farms. However concrete ponds of 100-200m        2




         can also be utilized for commercial purpose especially under
         intensive management.

3.0    COMMONLY CULTURED FISH SPECIES
       Generally the purpose of rearing fish is to have enough to eat
       and generate additional income especially in commercial farms.
       Not all fish -species perform creditably well in culture. For a
       profitable venture, the fish farmer’s ideal candidate species
       must have some of the following qualities.

       i.         Fast grower e.g Heterobranchus and Clarias
       ii.        Accept and utilize supplementary feeds properly. e.g
                  Tilapia or clarias.
       iii.       Hardy and resistance to disease, e.g Clarias
       iv.        Tolerant to poor water quality e.g Clarias
       v.         Easy to breed in captivity e.g. Tilapia
       vi.        Attract low production cost (Tilapia/Clarias)
       vii.       Acceptable (marketable) to consumers, e.g. Carp and
                  Heterotis, Tilapia and Clarias.
                                   8
In Nigeria. certain fish species that are found only in freshwater bodies
(that is rivers and lakes) do well under culture (Table 1). Some other
species that inhabit the marine environment can be cultured in brackish
water (lagoons and estuaries) (Table 2).

Table 1: Commonly Cultured Fish Species In Freshwater Ponds In Nigeria
   COMMON NAME                 SCIENTIFIC NAME
   Tilapia*                    Oreochromis, niloticus
                               Tilapia melanopleura
                               Tilapia guineensis
                               Sartherodon galilaeus
   Mud cat-fish…………..          Claria gariepinus
   Common Carp*………             Cyprinus, carpia
   Spotted Cat-fish**…..       Synodontis filamentosus
   Redmud Catfish………           Heterobranchus bi-dorsalis
   Niger perch**……….           Lates nilotus
   African bony tongue**.      Heterotis nilotcus
   Grey cat-fish………….          Chrysichthys nigrodigitatus
   Trunk-fish**…………..          Gymnarchus niloticus
   Silver catfish………….         Bagrus bayad
   African Carp**………...        Labeo coubie
   Moon fish**………….            Citharinus citherus

Table 2: Commonly Cultured Fish Species In Brackish Water Ponds
   COMMON NAME                 SCIENTIFIC
   Flat head grey mullet*      Mugul cepalus
   Tilapia                     Tilapia zilli
                                   Tilapia guinensis
    Atlantic Tarpon**              Meggalops atlanticus
    Ten pounder**
    (West African Lady fish)       Elops lacerta
    Grey cat fish**                Chysichthys nigrodigitatus
    African red snapper**          Lutijanus gorensis

                                          9
       *      Casual labor/maintenance wages.
       *      Transportation maintenance {fuel, etc)
       *      Consultancy cost where necessary.
       *      Other consumables.


8.0   FARM BUSINESS ANALYSIS

This is often used to show the levels of cost, return and profit that
accrue to a fish farm. The profitability of each option is determined to
show the strength and weakness of any acuaculture system. It is the
difference between the total revenue and total cost of production. The
revenue include items such as fish sold, harvest consumed at
home/farm, those given as gift and change in inventory.
Below (Table 6) is an empirical cost and returns analysis of a typical for
a two-fish combination under polyculture- This could also be dune for
the monoculture and multi-species combination in polycultur. Based
on the assumption that the two-fish types have been accepted as the
most feasible. Other profitability ratios can then be derived. Of course it
could be derived for the other aquaculture types and comparison
made. These could be used to determine the efficiency of the
enterprise chosen.
These ratios serve different purposes on the farm. For instance, if a
farmer uses labour on hired basis, the rate of return on operating cost is
very essential. These indicators are useful for both the fish farmers and
other stakeholders in the fishing industry -

The cost and returns analysis is not static; consideration should be
given to some of the variations and interactions of factors affecting
production and profit.


                                    10
     trial, and domestic effluents to prevent pollution and subsequent
     death of fish. Fish could easily be wiped out by pollution leading
     to great economic losses to farmers.

4.   Security
     Natural and man-induced enemies of fish exist Natural enemies
     include snakes, frogs. turtles, etc. These can cause substantial
     losses to a farmer since they are predators of fish. Cleaning the
     surroundings of pond site of bush and grasses will minimize risk
     of attack by predators. Human poaching on ponds can also
     result in great losses. Efforts must be made to provide adequate
     security.

5.   Natural Disaster
     Natural disasters may not be within the ability of a farmer to
     control, but exercising caution can make a fish farmer to avoid or
     limit its impact to the barest minimum. Fishponds should not be
     sited in flood plains and hilly lands that are subject to flooding.
     When constructing a. pond, adequate provision should be made
     for a well-compacted pond wall (clay), inflow and outflows, and
     spillway to take. care of possible flood.

6.   Management practices
     Abuse of aspects of management practices can make a
     farmmer incur great economic losses making the whole fish
     culture enterprise un-interesting. Recommended stocking,
     feeding, fertilization and liming rates should be adhered to, for
     profitable fish culture business.

7.   Gestation period
     Initially, the gestation period    for fish reaching the table or
                                 11
      market size could appear long to a potential investor. But with
      good management, the pay back period on loan could still be
      achieved. Most fish under semi-intensive and extensive system
      can be harvested within period of 9-12 months. A farmer can
      then hervest periodically as planned under intensive culture, a
      growth cycle of 6 months for fish to reach table size of 1-1.5kg id
      possible.

8     Marketing of Products.
      Fortunately, marketing risk is not pronounced in aquaculture in
      Nigeria. Fish products have an unsaturated market demand
      with annual demand-supply deficit of between 35-45%.
      However, the fish farmer should be aware of the attitude of
      consumers within the locality to the species of fish that the
      farmer wants to culture. This is more important to a large-scale
      farmer that is interested in quick investment turnover. Fish
      species that are likely to attract high market prices should be
      grown. Such include Gymnarchus niloticus, Clarias gariepinus
      and, Heterotis niloticus etc.

5.0   FA C T O R S T O C O N S I D E R F O R P R O F I TA B L E
      AQUACULTURE
      Under the right condition, aquaculture can be very profitable.
      The following checklist of questions can help determine whether
      an aquaculture enterprise is feasible for a particular situation or
      not. This does not over look the other aspect of accounting
      principles that are dealt with later in the bulletin. Also answering
      “yes” to cost of items/issues raised would not guarantee
      success just as answering “no” does not guarantee automatic
      failure. It is very advisable to contact your local extension agent
      for more technical details.

                                   12
5.1     Management
        The role of management is central to the success of any
 business enterprise. Management involves the integration of
 manpower, materials and money in a judicious way, such that
 anticipated profits can be assured. Practicing and potential
 aquaculturists should be guided by the following questions.
     !    Do you already have suitable pond or a site suitable for
          ponds?
     !    Do you have most of the machinery and equipment
          needed?
     !    Do you have the necessary financial resources?
     !    Is the potential of profit higher in aquaculture than that of
          other possible enterprises?
     !    Will the expected profit be adequate compensation for your
          labor, management and risk?
     !    Will investment and operating capital interest rates permit a
          reasonable profit?
     !    Is mono culture, polyculture or integrated the most suitable
          for your
     !    condition?
     !    Will you be able to forego income until you sell your fish
          crop? Are you able to absorb occasional losses?
     !    Are you willing to devote daily the time and effort required?

      Aquaculture is capable of significantly expanding the availability
      of fish products and the basic economic law of demand and
      supply will cause prices to fall as supplies increase.




                                  13
5.2.      Marketing
         In fish farming. market has key role to play in the management
decisions taken on any aspect. Management decisions, which affect
customers, are part of marketing and must be considered from
marketing point of view.
Marketing strategies for fish farmers involve the following procedures.
1.     Identify changing demands of market places
2.     Match production to market need
3.     Select ideal candidate fish species for culture i.e. fast growers,
       hardy, and good feed converters•
4.     Evaluate market acceptance of fish species to be grown
5.     Attempt satisfying buying pattern of consumers. More demand
       should lead to farm expansion.
6.     Match production and consumers needs to available resources.
7.     Apply the marketing mix concept. (4ps)
      a) Product planning and development
      b)      Place for transfer of product to consumer i.e. ideal selling
               location.
      c)      Promotion of product sales by advertisement and other
               sales promotion
      d)     Price determination and pricing policy

 Relevant questions in marketing the fish are: -
  v Do you know any established market for your fish?
  v Will the market for your fish at the planned sales time be
     available?
  v Are there suitable arrangements for harvesting your fish?
  v Can you be flexible and harvest fish during the off-season?
  v Is there an alternative marketing strategy which you hope to fall
     back to in case there is a problem with current arrangement?


                                   14
5.3       Physical Conditions
          Good physical conditions that are required for fish to grow well
          under culture are prerequisites to successful enterprise.
          Topography, soil structure, regular water supply, and security
          issues are important. Consider these questions in meeting
          adequate physical. conditions
      v    Is the topography of the area suitable for pond construction?
      v    Will the soil retain water?
      v    Are there enough water supplies to replace any water loss?
      v    Is the pond area liable to flooding?
      v    Are the drains adequate for proper water drainage?
      v    Can wild fish be prevented from entering the pond?
      v    Is the pond bottom stump-free to prevent difficulties in
           harvesting?
      v    Is the pond close to your residence for prompt management and
           monitoring?

5.4    Production
Major factors of production that are indispensable in economics are:
land, labor and capital. In aquaculture, the source of fingerlings,
adequacy of feed inputs and drugs, availability of technical support
(extension and consutancy) and feed storage facilities are also
important production factors.
Farmers should face the challenges of the following questions for
enhanced production: -
      !    Are good quality feeds readily available at competitive
           prices?
      !    Do you have reliable supply of drugs and other
           vaccines?
      !    Is the source of your fingerlings reliable?


                                     15
      !      Do you have dependable labor?
      !      Is your feed storage facility a good one?
      !      Do you know the extension agent/fishery officer in
             your area?

6.0     RECORD KEEPING
Many at times the major problem of most farm enterprise is lack of
reliable economic data. The best source of data is farm record either in
commercial, pilot or experimental farms. There are many forms of
records, but most of them simply list the input and output operation
both in physical (kg) and monetary terms. The collection and analysis
of data on costs and returns based on farm records provide among
others the information necessary to:
      !     determine the relative profitability of various production
            techniques or systems,
      !     compare the productivity of major inputs, such as
            land, labor, and capital, with that of alternative production
            activities and
      !     improve the efficiency of the farm operation.

Seasonal records on the other hand are annualized data to show
production and marketing trends over the years Such records enable a
farmer to respectively assess farm performance and project future
production trends for possible new investments.
There are two types of farm record, namely, daily and seasonal
records. Daily records are important so that the performance of the
farm operations can be fully evaluated. It is therefore necessary to
keep this record as simple and comprehensive as possible. A record
per pond can be kept. On the other hand, records on a number of ponds
in similar condition could be kept• In any case, each record can he kept
in a separate book or on separate pages of the same record book.



                                   16
 Where computers are handy separate file can be kept for each pond
or a number of ponds as the case may be. However, it is always
advisable to keep back- up copies of such files elsewhere either in hard
copies from time to time or in a soft copy on flash discs, diskettes, CDs,
etc. Types of information that can be kept in records of aquaculture
farms are discussed below:

6.1           Input records
There are two kinds of inputs: -variable and fixed, Variable inputs are
those which vary with the level of production such as fingerlings,
feeds, fertilizers, labor, drugs fuel, electricity and water. Variable inputs
often have variable costs. Fixed inputs on the other hand, are those
that do not change with the level of farming activity. Included in this
category are items such as rent on land, tax, interests, insurance
premiums, depreciation on fixed assets, and staff salaries. It is very
important to describe each of the variable input and or cost in as much
detail as possible. For example, if polyculture is practiced, then the
stocking materials should be classified by stocked species and by
sizes such as fingerlings, juveniles and adult fish. Feeds that are used
should be well specified in relation to the kind, e•g. pellet, rice meal,
ground-nut cake etc. In the ease of fertilizer, the kind should also be
specified e.g. poultry or pig manure, inorganic fertilizer etc. Table 3
shows a typical example of how each could he recorded in terms of
amount, unit and total cost.
Table 3: Daily records of a Typical Fish Farm
Date   Item                Kind             Quantity      Unit cost (N)   Total Cost
       Variable Inputs
       -Fingerlinsgs       Clarias etc      250           10.00           2500
       -Feed               Rice Bran        3 bags        150.00          450.00
       -Fertilizer         Poultry Manure   3 Trucks      200.00          600.00
       -Water              Up Stream        40,000lt      0.20            8,000.00
       -Fuel/Electricity   Diesel           3000 Litres   22              6,6,000.00




                                             17
Aquaculture practices other activities such as pond fertilization,
stocking, feeding, pond maintenance, harvesting and marketing.
These activities require labor. In that case it is very important to keep a
separate record for labor. The kind of labor should always be specified
in terms of adult, children, male, female. All wage payments should be
recorded too. One other important variable is farmer’s family labor.
This must be adequately recorded. (Table 4)
  Table 4: Labour Input Record for a Typical Fish Farm
  Date      Economic Activity Kind of Labour Duration (Day,                Wage Rate         Total Labour
            2                  3                  Hour)                    (per Man-         Cost 4=x5
                                                  4                        day N) 5
            Pond Preparation Adult Male           3 Man-days               150.00            450.00
            Feeding            Adult Female       4 hours                  15.00             60.00
            Harvest            Male Children      5 hours                  12.00             60.00
                                                                           Total             570.00

A list of fixed assets with their initial or current cost and their estimated
years of economic life is needed for calculating depreciation• The
easiest and commonest is the straight-line method. In this, the cost of
the asset is divided by the expected economic life span of the asset.
Where there is a salvage value, it is deducted from the initial cost
before annual depreciation is calculated. Where an asset has been
used for same years, the current replacement cost should be used
instead of its original cost of purchase. It is important to note that if the
fixed asset is shared between aquaculture and other far, activities, an
appropriate proportion should be determined for the fixed asset before
computing depreciation. Table 5 below shows hypothetical fixed asset
and depreciation.

Table 5: Fixed Asset Record of a Fish Farm
  Item     Year of    Cost (N)     Current     Salvage      Depreciable   Estimated   Proportion   Depreciation
           purchase                market      Value (N)    Balance       Economic    Used for
                                   value                    (N)           Life(yrs)   fish
                                                                                      Farming
           1          2            3           4            5             6           7            8=5/6x7
  Pond     1996       2000.00      800.00      150.00       1850.00       10          100          185
  Water    1997       1100.00      160,000.0   200.00       900.00        5           80           144
  Pump     1996       150,000.00               100,000.00   50,000.00     40          50           625
  Office




                                                             18
6.2 Output Record
The following are important items that should be included in output
record: Date of harvest, species harvested, (with amount and unit
price), and the, disposition of product. When determining or computing
gross revenue on the farm, cash and credit sales of the product should
be recorded. In addition computed values of home-consumed products
as well as those given out should be recorded. To get the computed
values of the home consumed or those given out, it is advisable to use
the current market prices of the fish. It is also important to have a record
of inventory at each period of accounting. Thus beginning and closing
inventory should be kept. At the end of each cycle or the year, the
quantity and value of production by species and the operation cost by
items of each fishpond or a group of ponds in similar conditions should
be summarized and presented in a single sheet The purpose of this is
to be able to know at a glance the farm’s production situation.
These records are important for various reasons as stated below:
         1.        Records help the farmer to establish a number of
                   facts or efficiency standard which form the basic tools
                   of diagnosis and planning
         2.        Records can provide the farmer with information on
                   production situation in the farm
         3.        A good record provides an effective mechanism for
                   monitoring and evaluating the farm
         4.        Records provide information for appraisal which may
                   show the strength or weakness of management
                   pattern the farmer adopted on the farm.
         5.        Records give data that may be used to formulate
                   plans and provide estimates
         6.        Records could be used for meeting some
                   legal/contractual arrangements


                                    19
        7.         Records add credibility to the claim of many
                 business organizations
        8.       Records may be used to create the spirit of
                 competition among farmers/workers, it could also
                 form the true basis for giving incentives to workers.

7.0          COST COMPONENTS TO CONSIDER
The cost items as earlier explained are composed of the fixed and
variable costs. While the fixed cost include items such as salaries of
staff, interest payment on loans depreciation on assets, taxes and
rents on land. The items of variable cost include payments for casual
labor, feeds, fingerlings, fuel and other consumables.
In a typical fish farm, the fixed arid variable cost items are outlined
below.

      A) Fixed cost items.
      *     Land (purchase) taxes and rents)
      *     Pumps/tanks and accessories and ether farm
      equipment.
      *     Farm structure (buildings, pond structure, etc)
      *     Brood stock acquisition
      *
      *     Interest payment on loans,
      *     Depreciation on assets.

     B) Variable cost items.
      *      Fish seed/Feed/Medication
      *      Fertilizers/manure/lime



                                  20
       *      Casual labor/maintenance wages.
       *      Transportation maintenance {fuel, etc)
       *      Consultancy cost where necessary.
       *      Other consumables.


8.0 FARM BUSINESS ANALYSIS
This is often used to show the levels of cost, return and profit that
accrue to a fish farm. The profitability of each option is determined to
show the strength and weakness of any acuaculture system. It is the
difference between the total revenue and total cost of production. The
revenue include items such as fish sold, harvest consumed at
home/farm, those given as gift and change in inventory.
Below (Table 6) is an empirical cost and returns analysis of a typical for
a two-fish combination under polyculture- This could also be dune for
the monoculture and multi-species combination in polycultur. Based
on the assumption that the two-fish types have been accepted as the
most feasible. Other profitability ratios can then be derived. Of course it
could be derived for the other aquaculture types and comparison
made. These could be used to determine the efficiency of the
enterprise chosen.
These ratios serve different purposes on the farm. For instance, if a
farmer uses labour on hired basis, the rate of return on operating cost is
very essential. These indicators are useful for both the fish farmers and
other stakeholders in the fishing industry -

The cost and returns analysis is not static; consideration should be
given to some of the variations and interactions of factors affecting
production and profit.



                                    21
        Table 6
         Cost and Returns of Tilapia-Clarias combination in a Poly-culture System.

   No                   Item                          Tilapia – Claris             % of Total
                                                                                   Cost
   1      Cost                               Unit    Quantity      Value
                                             price
                                             (N)
   A.     Operating Cost
          Labor                                120 126 Man-days          15,000        12.4
          Feed                                  5      2600kg            12,500        10.3
          Seed/fingerlings                       -        -                 -           -
              Tilapia                           5     2,400 No           12,000        9.9
              Clarias                           15    3,000 No           45,000        37.3
          Fertilizer                            30     400kg             12,000        9.9
          Lime                                   -        -                 -           -
          Other                                  -        -                 -           -
          Total Variable Cost                    -        -              96,500        80.0
          Fixed Cost                             -        -                 -           -
   B      Salaries                            2,000  12 months           24,000        19.9
          Depreciation                           -        -                 -           -
          Taxes                                  -        -                 -           -
          Interest Payment                       -        -                 -           -
          Total Cost                             -        -              120,500       100
   2.     Production and Revenue Output
                Tilapia                        20         600            12,000           -
              Clarias                          100        1200           120,000          -
          Gross Income                          -           -            132,000          -
   3      Profitability
          Net Income (132-120.5) ‘000                                    11,500
          Rate of Return on Investment                                    9.5%
          Rate of Return on Operating cost                               11.9%
          Production per man day                                         14.4Kg
          Value of production per man -day                               N1056


9.0 INVESTMENT ANALYSIS

For a sound decision to be made a good analysis of records and data
on the farm is necessary. We shall consider a farmer who is trying to go
into either monoculture or polyculture practices for better
understanding. He has to determine how profitable the venture would
be and then make a choice. Below are the various profitability
measures, which he can use.



                                                     22
9.1 Payback Method: -It is simply the time taken for expected
enterprise to fully recover the initial investment. In order words, it is the
time taken for the investment choice to fitly pay the exact amount
invested in the project. Depreciation. interest and tax charges are
usually not included in this computation. For example, consider the
options shown in Table 7 below. The payback time is 5 years for option
I, since by end of the fifth year enough cash has been generated to
recover the initial investment of N 2,900.00 with N 600.00 to spare. For
option ll, the payback time is 3 years. By the end of 3 years enough
profit has been made to recoup the initial investment ofN2,900.00. With
regards to option 111, (Tilapia-Bargus-Clarias) the payback time is 6
years. The payback method is useful for closing the project, which
repays the initial investment in the shortest time. According to this
method therefore, Option II(Tilapia — Clarias) is preferable as the initial
investment is recovered within 3 years as against 5 years for option I
(monoculture of Tilapia) and 5 years for Option (polyculture of Tilapia-
Bagrus Clarias). Payback period method builds on the need to avoid
risk by valuing early returns highly. But then, returns beyond the
payback period are ignored, hence some very profitable opportunities
may be forgone.

      Table 7: Illustration of Payback Periods for different stocking combinations
                                  Option        Option II         Option III Tilapia
                                  Tilapia       Tilapia-Clarias   Bargrus-Clarias
                                          N              N                     N
         Year 0                       (2,900)         (2,900)               (2,900)
         Year 1                         700            1,000                  510
         Year 2                         700            1,000                  510
         Year 3                         700            1,000                  510
         Year 4                         700            2,000                  510
         Year 5                         700            2,500                  510
         Year 6                         700              0                    510
         Year 7                         800              0                    510
         Year 8                         900              0                    450
         Year 9                           0              0                    510
         Year 10                          0              0                    900
         Cumulate Net Cash Flow        3000            4,600                 1,000



                                                23
The other advantages of this method are;
a.    It is a simple cash flow, easily understood by farmers
b.    It values early returns and keeping liquidity (cash at hand) in a
      situation of cash storage
c.    Projects needing small capital outlays that payback early in their
      expected life are easily identified without spending much time
      on more complex studies
d.    It helps to isolate poor projects that have a long pay back time.
e.    This method helps in a situation where a risky project needing
      quick recovery of fund is concerned. It thus saves time by
      automatically accepting or rejecting many possible
      investments.
Nevertheless, one of the major disadvantages of this method is that it
does not take into account the time value of money.

9.2 The Peak-Profit Method:
This involves presenting the level of profits in the best year as a
percentage return on the sum invested. Using the figures in Table 7 for
Option Il, (Tilapia), the highest profit was obtained in the 8th year
(N900.00) which is 3% of the original investment. For Option (Tilapia-
Clarias) and Ill (Tilapia-Bagrus-Clasias) their peak-profit was 51.0%
(5 year) and 20.4% (10 year) respectively. Therefore Option II (Tilapia-
  th                    th




Clarias) with the highest peak profit is preferable to the other options.

This method assumes that peak profit is a reliable guide to average
profitability of a project. The use of this method has some
disadvantages though. Some projects reach their peak profit early
while it may take a considerable time for others. A project with a low,
early and consistent profit that give higher profit later can be a good
option as early profit may be re-invested. Therefore, overall profit
maximization may likely involve more than maximizing peak profit.


                                   24
9.3 Net Present Value
This is sometimes called excess present value. It is the present value of
future net cash in flows minus the initial capital cost. That is, the
present value of the surplus profits expected after repayment of
principal and interest. This is based on the understanding that a Naira
today is better/higher than a Naira tomorrow. Consider the three
options with an initial capital outlay of N 2,900.00, and the streams of
incomes as shown in columns 2,4 and 6 in Table 8. If the streams of
profit are capitalized i.e exchanging the streams of future receipts for a
single, discounted value, we can then compare the projects more
easily.

Given some time preference rate, each year’s net cash flow can be
reduced to a present value by multiplying it by l/(l+r) Where r = Interest
                                                     n.




Rate and n is the year considered. This process is known as
discounting. This may be difficult to calculate using the above formula.
Luckily there are tables which gives the value of 1/(1+r) for a wide
                                                             n




range of values of r and n. The figure obtained is known as the discount
factor. The present values of all the annual net cash flows can then be
summed up to give the Total Present Value. If the initial investment is
subtracted from the total present value, the result is called the Net
Present Value (NPV).

For example, assuming that the three aquaculture projects with initial
capital outlay of N 2,900.00 gave different returns (profit) for different
years as outlined in Table 8, the Net Cash flows have to be brought to
their present values (discounted). These values can then be compared
and a choice made depending on how favourable the venture to be
chosen is. This has been done and presented in Table 8 below,




                                   25
   Table 8 Net Present Value (NPV) of three aquaculture system
      Year            Discount   Project 1 Tilapia            Project II Tilapia-          Project III Tilapia
                      factor                                  Clarias                      Bagrus-Clarias
                      20%        NCF          PV              NCF           PV             NCF           PV
      0               1          2            3=1x2           4             5=4x1          6             7=6x1
      1               1          (2900)       (2,900)         (2,900)       (2,900)        (2,900)       (2,900)
      2               0.8333     700          583.31          1,000         833.3          510           424.98
      3               0.5787     700          405.09          1,000         578.7          510           295.14
      4               0.4823     700          337.61          2,000         964.6          510           245.97
      5               0.4019     700          281.33          2,000         803.8          510           204.97
      6               0.3399     700          237.93          -             -              510           173.35
      7               0.2791     700          195.37          -             -              450           125.60
      8               0.1938     800          186.08          -             -              510           118.63
      9               0.1615     -            -               -             -              900           174.42
      10              0.1615     -            -               -             -              700           113.05
      Cumulative NCF                 2,800           NA           4,100             NA         2,020             NA
      Total Present Value             NA          2,712.8          NA            3,071           NA        2,230.25
      Less Initial Investment         NA          2,900.00         NA           2,900.00         NA        2,900.00
      Net Present Value               NA           -187.2          NA             171            NA        -669.75


PV = Present Value
NCF=Net Cash Flow

When the training of the net cash flow is accounted for, it is clear that
only Option II (Tilapia-Clarias) can repay the capital cost with an
interest of 2O percent in ten years. Option II is the most favored and
therefore chosen. In this case an average of 20% has been used for
explanation purposes. Using a discount factor of say 16 per cent may
show a different picture of the options. It is worthy to note that a
reasonable discount rates that takes the rate of inflation and interst
into consideration is preferred. This is because different rates
give.different ranking between projects. It should-be noted that when
using the Net Present Value, a negative figure shows that the project
considered is not worth investing in but if a choice must be made the
one with the lowest negative value is chosen. The major disadvantage


                                                             26
 of this is its inability to give an adequate indication of what choice to
make in the case of different options. Another simpler tool that could be
used is the Benefit cost ratio. It shows the ratio of the accrued benefits
of the project to the expended funds. A ratio of less than one shows that
the project is not viable.

9.4 Internal Rate of Return (IRR)

This is perhaps the most commonly used method of capital investment
analysis. It considers net earning over the entire life span of the
investment. Simply put, it is the rate at which the net present worth of
the cash flow equal zero. It could be represented mathematically using
our example in Table 8, we can calculate the IRR which could be
termed a response to a question in the mind of the investor. This
question is, what interest rate will this option (II) earn considering the
fact that it has a positive Net Present Value that is highest among the
three options? We equally have a question such as what is the earring
power of the money invested in this option? This is termed IRR. It is
calculated using the following method (It uses two discount factors as
follows).

IRR=Lower discount rate+ Absolute difference                  (Present worth of cash
between the two flow at the lower discount rate) Discount rates       (Absolute
difference between the present worth of the cash flow at the two discount rates)
                                   = 10+6(2,194.6)
                                            (786.8)
                                   = 26.7
                                   = 27%




                                         27
The IRR for the Tilapia-Clarias project is therefore 27%. The major
advantage of this is that the outcome of this analysis is often stated in
percentages. The actual rate of returns as could be seen is that found
by an interpolation between discount rate to say 10 per cent or by
increase it to 25 per cent as deserved. The implication of the result
above is that every naira invested in the project will generate 27k.
The IRR for Options I and III, are 18% and 14% respectively using the
above formula and thus confirming our earlier choice using other
methods. It should be noted that, it is usually a project that has an IRR
above the cost of borrowing of capital that is accepted, Projects are
ranked in order of the value of IRR. It is not that this method is error
proof, but major problems that could arise due to trial and error can be
overcome especially by using good electronic calculators. Another
problem is that of over simplification in assuming a uniform return that
is constant over a period of time and constant inflation rate that is dealt
with through the process of discounting.




                                    28
10.0 CONCLUSION

Fish culture is an interesting enterprise that can be highly profitable.
Prospective investors should know the basic investment analysis that
will guide them in taking decision. This is what this bulletin has tried to
provide, With detail preparation of feasibility of projects, financial
institutions and some non-governmental organization will have
adequate information to assist prospective fish farmers. It is hoped that
the information in this bulletin will go a long way in helping fish farmers
to keep production and financial records for sustainable and profitable
enterprises.




                                    29
                               BIBLIOGRAPHY

Amos T. T. (2000). Sustainable Fish Culture Practice in Kano Stale
     Nigeria: An Economic Analysis. Unpublished Ph.D thesis. Dept
     of Agric. Econs ABU., Zaria. 120p

Bolorunduro P.I. and .J. Awelewa (1994). Fishpond Sit Selection and
      Construction. NAERLS Extension Bulletin No.98 Fisheries
      Series No.2 20p

Bolorunduro P.I.      and A. Abdullahi (1996)   Water Quality
      Management in Fish Ponds. NAERLS Extension Bulletin No 98
      Fisheries Series No 3.52p

Norman Hilton. (1983). Farm Planning in the Early Stages of
     Development FAO Agricultural Services Bulletin No 1.105p

Olukosi, J O. and Erhabor P.O. (1987). Introduction to Farm
     Management Economics. Agitab Publishers Ltd, Zaria. 95p

Shell, E. W. (1983). Fish Farming Research. Alabama Agricultural
       Experiment Station. Auburn University, Alabanta. 108p.

Yung C. Shang. (1981). Aquaculture Economics: West view Press,
     London. 153p.




                                30
