       FISH POND SITE SELECTION AND
                  CONSTRUCTION




              EXTENSION BULLETIN No. 96

                    Fisheries Series No 2


                        Published by




National Agricultural Extension and Research Liaison Services
                  Ahmadu Bello University,
                           Zaria.



                            1994
                         ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
        All the sources of information (documented in Textbooks, Guides, and
training papers as cited in this bulletin) are acknowledged. Such inputs
contributed in no small measures to putting together the technical message to
prospective and practical fish farmers this bulletin is meant for.


                 Bolorunduro, P.I. and Joseph Awelewa
                                TABLE OF CONTENT

      Acknowledgement............................................................. 2
1.0   Introduction........................................................................ 3
2.0   General considerationS in selecting sites for fish ponds.... 5
       2.1 Water source and supply.......................................... 6
       2.2 Nature of soil/Land availability............................... 6
       2.3 Topography.............................................................. 8
       2.4 Vegetation of the site............................................... 9
       2.5 Other considerations................................................ 9
3.0   Planning the pond............................................................... 11
4.0   Constructing the pond........................................................ 13
       4.1 Surveying and clearing land site.............................. 13
       4.2 Marking out area of pond........................................ 13
       4.3 Measuring and marking out the wall....................... 13
       4.4 Evacuating the pond................................................ 13
       4.5 Embankment/pond wall building............................. 14
       4.6 Drainage structure.................................................... 15
5.0   Pond structure maintenance................................................ 17
6.0   Possible construction problems and solutions.................... 18
7.0   Fish pond construction cost items...................................... 19




                                                 2
1.0   Introduction
               This bulletin is written to assist prospective and practicing fish
      farmers, and interested persons on the basics of how to identify good
      sites for earthen fish pond construction. Fish farming can be a
      profitable business, if the “rule of the game” are followed in its
      management. The information contained in the bulletin is meant to
      lead people to interesting fish farming through proper site selection
      and construction of durable ponds and profitable enterprise.
               A fish pond is an enclosure (earthen or concrete) built to retain
      water for the purpose of growing fish to table-size for household
      consumption and for sale to generate additional income. Culturing
      fish in ponds from which they can rarely escape allows feeding,
      breeding, growing and harvesting of the fish in a well-planned manner.
      Fish pond constructed in a proper way and managed under controlled
      conditions gives the highest possible fish production with respect to
      the size of the pond or reservoir. Fish pond can be constructed on
      either small-scale or large-scale basis. Small-scale fish rearing can be
      carried out in a suitable house backyard (Home-stead). The purpose
      for this could be to keep the fish for house-hold consumption or as a
      hobby. On the other hand fish culture may be on a large commercial
      scale covering a large area of land and made up of many ponds. This
      set up is often referred to as a fish farm. In addition to fish ponds there
      are other types of enclosures used for rearing fish. These include
      tanks, (concrete, fibregiass, platics) cages, pens, reservoirs and
      raceways.
               The practice of growing fish in ponds can be beneficial to a
      farmer. Such benefits include the following:
      1.       By growing fish, an avenue is created for additional source of
               protein. Fish protein is among the richest animal proteins.
               Protein is necessary in human diet for repairs of body tissues
               and for healthy growth.


                                      3
      2.        Growing fish will provide a farmer an additional source of
               income. Depending on the cycle of harvesting of the pond, the
               farmer can be assured of regular income from sales of
               harvested fish.
      3.        In large fish farms, employment opportunity can be created for
                the people that maintain the pond on a daily basis. These
                people are paid for the work they do. Fish processors and
                sellers also benefit form such farms.
      4.        Lands or part of lands that are not productive in growing arable
                crops can be converted to fish ponds. A farmer therefore
                maximizes the use of such lands.
      5.        A fish pond can be easily managed by a family. Once the
                construction work is over, maintenance work and feeding, etc.
                require little labour, especially when the family resides close to
                the pond. In practice the labour requirements for such a pond
                are such that the owner could attend to his normal business and
                his fish pond would bring him an additional income with very
                little extra labour from members of his household.
      6.        Food requirements necessary for fish to grow fast in ponds can
                easily be met by the fish farmer. Animal and compost manure
                can be used to make pond water fertile for production of natural
                fish foods. Also local source of feed ingredients for feeding
                fish include plant materials like rice brans, maize (and other
                grain) brans, cotton seed cake, groundnut cake, blood meal,
                bone meal, fish meal, palm kernel cake, etc, insects, worms and
                other smaller organisms.
2.0   General Considerations in Selecting SuitableSites.
      Every farmer or individual wants success in business enterprise.
      Considerations in growing fish in pond can be outlined below. These
      are general considerations. Technical aspects will be treated in details
      later in this bulletin as applied to pond excavation.


                                       4
2.1   Water Source and Supply
      Water is the medium for fish growth and it is the major limiting factor
      in fish culture. Water sources must be free from pollutants. These are
      substances either in effluent or solid forms that are toxic to fish. Water
      that gives offensive odour, brownish/muddy or filled with domestic
      effluents is not suitable for growing fish. Good sources of water for
      fish pond includes; flowing river/stream, tidal flow from the sea,
      brackish water from lagoons, spring water, borehole/well water, and
      good pipe borne water. If the water is too clear then it needs addition of
      manure/fertilizer; if muddy it required settling by application of lime,
      if smelly/brown, it is acidic and requires liming. Water supply must be
      regular to the fish pond. Pipe borne water must be stored in a tank or
      reservoir for at leeast 24hours before usage. This will allow the
      chlorine contaned to settle.
2.2   Nature of the Soil/Land Availability
      Land is a major factor of production. Fish ponds are built on land
      either by excavating the soil or by building embankment structures. A
      prospective fish farmer should therefore ensure that the land to be used
      is legally acquired, this is important since a fish pond structure can be
      maintained for as long as ten to fifteen years in production cycles. Soil
      at the site to be chosen must be tested for its capacity to retain water. A
      good soil for fish culture must be able to hold water. Soils may be
      classified into three major types for fish pond construction purpose:
      a.       Pervious soil
      b.       Impervious soil
      c.       Peaty soil

      a)      Pervious Soil
              Pervious soil have very little water retaining capacity,
              and are very sandy or of mixed gravel and sand. Such
              soils should be avoided. However, areas adjoining lakes and


                                      5
     lagoons, even if pervious, would be permanently soaked with
     water. It would then be possible to construct ponds by
     complete excavation in these sites since there will be no
     seepage as the soil must have been soaked with water.
b)   Impervious Soil
     Impervious soils consist of silt or clay or a mixture of one or
     both of these with a small percentage of sand and or gravel.
     Such soils have good water retaining properties and sites with
     this type of soil are suitable for constructing fish ponds. Often
     the soil condition may be a mixture of (a) and (b) above. The
     selection would then depend on the amount of seepage. Where
     seepage is excessive the water retaining property of the pond
     bottom can be improved by spreading a layer of clay or silt, if
     they are available close by and if it is economical to do so.
     Alternatively a concrete ponds may be constructed in such
     places with complete flooring of pond wall and bottom
c)   Peaty Soils
     Peaty soils have a high percentage of partly decomposed
     vegetation and are spongy in texture. The decomposed
     vegetation readily change the chemical nature of the pond
     water in a manner that reduces its productivity. Peaty soils are
     acidic, although such soils can be treated with lime to increase
     the PH to acceptable range (PH 6.5-8) and hence fish
     productivity.
     Both pervious and impervious soils may be divided into
     groups depending on their chemical nature: (i) alkaline and
     (ii) acidic soils. Alkaline soils (PH >8) are more productive for
     fish culture than acidic soils (PH<7) and should be preferred
     when selecting sites.
     A simple way of testing soil suitability for pond construction is
     as follows:


                            6
(i)     Dig the soil to about 10cm deep and take sample at that
        depth. Wet a handful of the soil with water and rub it
        on the palms. If it forms a continuous thread then it is
        most likely to retain water for fish culture (Fig. 1).
(ii)    Squeeze a little amount of the moist soil, if it holds
        shape then it is good and suitable for pond (Fig. 1)




   Fig. 1: Testing Good Soil for Pond Construction

(iii)   A bucket full of water can also be gradually poured into
        the dugged hole. If the percolation rate (speed of
        disappearance of the water into the soil) is fast (i.e.
        within 1 minute) the site is not likely to retain water for
        fish pond. Soil experts can also be consulted for
        analysis in case of large-scale fish farming with huge
        capital investment. The advantage of detailed soil
        analysis is that information will be known on soil
        physical, chemical and biological properties. This
        wealth of information would ease the management of
        the pond after construction.


                        7
2.3.   Topography (Landscape)
       This refers to the shape of the land. Land that is sloppy but not exposed
       to soil erosion is suitable for fish pond. To supply water to the pond by
       free flow (gravity) the pond site should be at a lower level than the
       water source. Therefore to select the site for the ponds and mark out
       the route for the channels a detailed survey of the area should be
       carried out. The survey helps to plan the layout of the ponds in such a
       way as to keep the earth work to the bearest minimum. It is desirable
       that pond sites have a gentle slope (1:2) to permit large ponds to be
       constructed (Fig. 2). However if the land available is flat, dugout
       ponds should be constructed with a slanting bottom to facilitate
       complete drainage of the pond as management practice may required.




       Fig. 2: Small valleys with gentle slope have excellent potential for
       pond construction

2.4    Vegetation of the site
       The type of vegetation on the pond site would determine the cost of
       clearing the site for pond construction. Densely vegetated lands can
       be very expensive to clear, taking into consideration the cost of felling
       and removing the trees and the root stumps. Stumps left in the soil can
       decay later and cause pollution. Even if fish grow well in such sites,


                                      8
      there is the risk of the stumps tearing nets at harvesting. Therefore as
      much as possible lands that are thickly vegetated should be avoided or
      the sites should be properly cleared. Sites in the Savannah belt are
      cheaper to clear since there are fewer trees and roots to be removed.
2.5   Other Considerations
      Other considerations a prospective fish farmer must bear in mind in
      starting the project include the following:
      (i)     Accessibility of the Project Site
              The site must be within reach for ease of management and
              supervision. Such a site will also facilitate marketing of
              products especially for large-scale operators.
      (ii)    Security
              The project site must be kept to wade off thieves from
              harvesting the fish. Site must also be protected from natural
              enemies of fish like water snakes, water birds, frogs, etc. The
              pond water should be free from domestic interference and
              access to cattle. Hoofs of cattle can damage pond wall.
      (iii) Labour Availability
              Both skilled manpower and casual labourers must be available
              to manage the pond especially in large fish farms. Farmers
              should know the nearest location of research and extension
              staff in fisheries and other service providers. This formation
              can be obtained from the Ministry of Agriculture, Research
              Institutes or Fish Farmers Associations that are nearby.
      (iv)    Availability of Inputs
              Fish farming inputs include fish seeds (fingerlings),
              supplementary feeds, fertilizers/manures, and other fish pond
              accessories. Prospective farmers should obtain information
              from the Ministry of Agriculture on how to source these inputs
              from the locality.



                                     9
      (v)      Market for Products
               The knowledge of the attitude of consumers within the locality
               to the species of fish to be cultured is important. This is more
               relevant in large-scale fish farming where the fish farmer is
               interested in making additional income. Fish species that are
               likely to attract high market prices should be grown in the
               pond.
3.0   Planning the Ponds
      The assurance of a regular and good source of water supply and land
      that can retain water for fish culture is the impetus the farmer needs in
      planning how large the pond should be and how many of a particular
      unit or units should be constructed. Having done the survey of the
      land, it is easy to plan the layout of the ponds and channels on paper.
      The main objective should be to make the best possible use of the land
      (topography) at minimum construction cost. Experience has shown
      that each site has its own peculiarities and problems and solutions have
      to be found to overcome them. The following are useful hints in
      planning the ponds.
      1.       The shape and size of the pond should fit in with the
               topography of the land. The topography may warrant a pond to
               be circular, square or rectangular.
      2.       The bottom of the pond should be sloping to the point close to
               the embankment where drainage facilities (outlets) will be
               installed. The slope should be 1:2. The water inlet(s) to the
               pond should be placed preferably at the shallowest end.
      3.       If more than one pond is constructed it is better to have
               independent water supply (inlets) to each pond and also
               separate outlets. By this it would be possible to drain the
               water from each pond without the water having to flow
               through a second pond. Such ponds are called parallel
               ponds (Fig. 3). The advantage of this construction is that,


                                     10
in case of parasites and diseases outbreak in one pond, its water
can be easily drained and the other ponds will not be affected.




                       Figure 3: Parallel Ponds.
4.      Smaller ponds are easier to manage than larger ones. For
        family owned ponds it is advisable to limits the size of each
        pond to a maximum of 0.2 ha if the water supply is adequate
        and land is available. However ponds of 0.01ha units are
        suitable for homestead fish culture. Although a single large
        pond could be cheaper to construct, the smaller size would
        facilitate stocking and harvesting programs for the family.
        Earthen ponds meant for commercial purposes should not have
        total area less than 0.25ha. A farmer needs such a size to attract
        loans from financial institutions for fish farming projects.
5.      Pond depth can vary from 1 to 2 meters. Ponds should not be
        too shallow or too deep. Shallow ponds can easily be
        made muddy by action of wind or soil disturbance by
        human activities. Such ponds also will easily expose the
        fish to predation by their natural enemies. Ponds that
        are too deep will pose management problems to farmers


                               11
      especially during harvesting period. Ponds of average depth of
      between 1-2 meters are suitable for culture of most fresh water species
      in Nigeria. Generally water depth in pond should not be less than 1
      meter. A fish farmer can use graduated stick to check the water level
      regularly to ensure replacement of water lost to evaporation or
      seepage.
4.0   Constructing the Pond
      Once a suitable site has been selected and the land has been surveyed,
      depending on the nature of the area, the size and number of the ponds,
      construction can be done manually or mechanically. Manual labour
      can be used if a small size pond is planned or in swampy or marshy area
      where machines can not be used. Use of machine (Bulldozer scraper,
      etc) is advantageous where large ponds are to be constructed. In
      general, steps in pond construction can be outlined as follows:
4.1   Surveying and clearing land site
      For homestead ponds visual survey on water sources, topography and
      soil is sufficient. But for larger ponds, detailed survey by registered
      surveyors is necessary. Such survey is to determine land slopes and
      position of inlet and outlet structures.
4.2   Marking out area of pond
      This is length and breath measurement. Pegs and measuring tapes are
      used. The actual area to be dug is the inner core, while the outer core is
      the eventual pond dike.
4.3   Measuring and marking out the walls
      Wall or dikes (dam) for fish ponds should be up to 0.5m thick and 0.5m
      high above the ground level. Strong pond wall will prevent collapse of
      pond structure at flooding periods.
4.4   Excavating the pond
      This can be done manually or with machine Earth moved from
      the pond serves for construction of the dikes. The main parts of
      the pond to be constructed during excavation are the pond walls/


                                     12
      embankment, the pond water inlet structure and outlet structure.




                        Figure 4: Main parts of a pond

4.5   Embankment/Pond Wall Building
      To impound and retain water in a pond, in most cases, it is necessary to
      construct embankments. Embankments (also known as dikes) are
      reinforced walls built above the ground level. The embankments
      should be strong enough to withstand water pressure and should be
      leak proof. The height of the embankment should be at least 60cm
      above the highest water level that will be reached within the pond.
      The dimensions for the embankment i.e. the width of the crest and
      base, height and slopes would depend on depth of water to be retained
      in the pond and type of soil to be used, for the construction of the
      embankment. For 1m to 1.5m depth of water the crest should have a
      minimum width of 1m. Sandy soils, which are pervious, should not be
      used for the construction of embankment, as it would result in the loss
      of water by leakage. A mixture of impervious soils like clay or slit and




                                    13
      pervious soils like sand or laterite is best. The advantage of such a
      mixture is that it remains firms both under wet and dry conditions.
4.6   Drainage structure
      a)     Pond Inlet Structure
             The inlet structure is built to supply water into the pond.
             Where the source of water is by diversion from a stream/river,
             it is best to construct the junction of the diversion channels with
             concrete to prevent the water from eroding the channel way
             into the pond (Fig. 5). To prevent predators and other unwanted
             fish species from getting to the pond a screen can be used at the
             channel junction. For small ponds diverted from slow flowing
             water bodies plastic pipes can be used as diversion channels.
             Generally the inlet structure should be raised above desired
             level of water so that water falling into the pond can help in
             aeration. Large ponds are water fed through sluice gates.
             Sluice gates consist of concrete gate built fit into the grooves.
             The wooden boards are slipped in and out of the grooves to
             allow water in or stop water going into pond. One of the
             grooves is usually provided with screen to prevent wild-fish
             going into the pond.




                                 Figure 5 Diversion pond


                                     14
b)   Pond Outlet Structure
     Fish ponds have to be emptied either partially or fully,
     especially during harvesting time. When there is excess water
     in the pond it has to be drained to required level to prevent pond
     wall from being weakened and collapsing. A good drainage
     system is enhanced when ponds are built on a good slope. The
     system must be built before the walls because most of them go
     through the base of the main pond wall. Drainage structure
     should be screened with fine wire mesh to prevent escape of
     fish. For large ponds, sluice and monk built on concrete base
     to prevent possible erosion are the drainage structure (Fig. 6).
     The monk functions only as an outlet structure. Monk consists
     of a vertical tower shaped like ‘U’ and it opens towards the
     pond. A pipe goes through the pond wall from the back of the
     monk to the outside. The two side walls of the monk have three
     parallel grooves, which are continuos with that on the concrete
     floor. The grooves are where the wooden boards can be slotted
     to stop water from seeping. The monk is much like a sluice
     gate, but it is not built into the pond wall. Monk should be
     constructed at least 0.5meters away form the foot of the wall in
     the deepest part of the pond and at least 40cm above the water
     level, but not more, as this will make the removal of boards
     difficult. The drainage pipes should be at least 0.3 meter below
     the pond and slopes at 45 for good draining.
                               o




                            15
                                Figure 6. Monk Structure
5.0   Pond Structure Maintenance
      A fish farmer should develop maintenance culture for the pond
      constructed, whether the pond is large or small, resources have been
      invested in constructing it. Fish ponds that are well maintained can
      serve the farmer for between 10 – 15 years or even more. The
      following are practical hints that will help in pond structure
      maintenance.
      i.     Newly constructed pond should not be stocked with fish
             species immediately. Such a pond should be flooded with
             water to the desired level and observe for 1 – 2 weeks. This
             will allow for observation on the pond capacity to retain water,
             as well as monitoring the rate of water loss. The strength of the
             pond wall will also be known so also the efficiency of the inlet
             and outlet structures.
      ii.    The crest of the pond and the pond surroundings
             should not be left bare, as this will encourage erosion
             during rainfall. Grasses like vetivar, carpet grass and bahama


                                    16
             Grass can be planted around dam wall to prevent erosion.
             These will also help the dam to maintain structural rigidity. A
             pond surrounding that is well-grassed will also have an added
             advantage of beautifying the environment.
      iii.   Pond environment should be cleared of bushes. Natural fish
             enemies that are harmful to fish and man hide in bushes.
             Parasites of fish are mostly transferred to ponds through
             predators. A healthy pond environment will make fish pond
             management practices interesting to a farmer.
      iv.    Regularly check the pond structures, and any noticed damages
             should be immediately amended. If for instance the
             embankment is leaking, it should be repaired immediately to
             forestall further expansion and possible breakdown of the
             entire structure.
      v.     As much as possible prevent cattle and other large ruminants
             from exploiting the pond environment. Hoofs of animals can
             break pond wall constituting extra maintenance cost to
             farmers. Walls of concrete ponds should be regularly cleaned.
             This is because remnant foodstuff and phytoplanktons readily
             gets attach to the wall. Fish can easily contact skin diseases
             (lesions) by contact with such materials.
      vi.    After an average production cycle of 12 – 18 months, pond
             water should be totally drained and expose to sunlight. This
             will help in disinfecting the pond.
6.0   Possible Construction Problems and Solutions
      1.     Area of ponds (earthen or concrete) should not be less than
             25m , but ideally 100m . Smaller ponds don’t provide adequate
                  2                  2




             space for fish biotic activities thus hindering fish growth rates.
             Smaller ponds are also easily prone to frequent water quality
             problem especially in feeding and fertilization.
      2.     Pond depth should be within a range of 1-2m. Shallower ponds


                                     17
              ponds (less than 1m) will not have enough water for fish
              activities. Ponds that are too deep (above 2m) pose
              management problems especially at harvesting.
      3.      Pond bottom should slant in such a way that a provision of 0.2 –
              0.3m difference is made between the upper slope and lower
              slope. This is for easy pond drainage either by gravity or water
              bailing/pumping during harvesting period.
      4.      Pond wall (dike) should be reinforced with boulders and
              compacted well for strength to withhold possible flooding.
      5.      As much as possible pond wall should be planted with grasses
              and watered regularly. This helps in structural rigidity.
7.0   Fish Pond Construction Cost Items
      Construction cost items are difficult to estimate since prices of inputs
      vary from place to place and even year to year. Below is information
      that would help in arriving at useful estimate depending on the pond
      size, and area of location.
      1.      Earthen Pond
              i.      Cost of land acquisition
              ii.     Cost of labour to excavate the land, to required depth
              iii.    Cost of construction of pond well
              iv.     Cost of fencing materials to prevent human and animal
                      intrusion.
              v.      Cost of pipes for water inlet and outlet (and other
                      accessories).
              vi.     Cost of fingerlings to be purchased
              vii.    Cost of feeds – e.g. Grains brans, Groundnut cake etc.
              viii. Cost of fertilizer/manure/lime
              ix.     Cost of harvesting net/gear




                                    18
     x.    Miscellaneous cost of repairs, and other minor
           maintenance practices (operating cost).
2.   Concrete Pond
     i.    Cost of blocks
     ii.   Cost of cement, sand gravel and five stone.
     iii   Cost of plumbing accessories
     iv    Cost of concrete nylon and nettings




                       19
                            BIBLIOGRAPHY

Board J. P; de kimpe, Js Lazard; J. Lemasson and P. Lessent (1976)
      Handbook of Tropical Fish Culture, Centre Technique Forester
      Tropical, France 165p.

Bolorunduro, P.I. (1993). Fish pond site selection, construction and
      management. Training paper at orientation workshop for Livestock
      Extension Agents under the unified Agricultural Extension System in
      Nigeria, held in NAERLS, ABU, Zaria 21 – 25 June.10P
                                                st   th




DFFRI (1988). Directorate for Food Road and Rural Infrastructure Extension
     Guide No. 1.1 16p

Sivalingam S. (1974). A guide to construction of fish ponds Federal Fisheries
       Occasional paper No. 20. 28p
5.3 Methods of Feeding Fish
      Fish can be fed supplementary feeds in two ways - Manually or
      Mechanically.
      1.     Manual Feeding
             This is carried out by a process called broadcasting i.e.
             throwing feeds into the pond by hand either on one spot in the
             pond or over a wide area (Figure 4). Broadcasting is a good
             method of feeding fish because the farmer can observe the
             behavior of the fish. This practice is however labor intensive,
             especially in large fish farms. It is however very suitable for
             small-holder aquaculturists. When a farmer feeds the fish
             from one spot in the pond, feeding frames can be placed at one
             or 2 spots in the pond to minimize feed wastage (Figure 5).




            Figure 4. Feeding Fish in the pond by broadcasting.



                                    20
                 Figure 5. Feeding Frames in a Fish Pond.


2.   Mechanical Feeding
     This is suitable for large-scale commercial fish farms. The method
      is capital intensive and is performed by mechanical feeders, which
     could either be demand type or automatic.
     i        Demand Feeder.
              This makes feeds available to fish on “demand”. It operates
              through a simple funnel shaped device with a metal trigger
              hanging into the water. A measured amount of feed is placed in
              the funnel and the feed is released when the fish shakes the
              metal trigger (Figure 6).




                                   21
            Figure 6. Demand Feeder.

ii   Automatic Feeder
     This is a clock work programmed device that discharges a
     measured amount of feed at specified intervals in a day. It is
     highly capital-intensive and not suitable to small-scale fish
     farmers (Figure 7).




                           22
5.4   Golden Rules in Feeding Fish
      RULE 1:         Always feed fish at the same time and place.
      Fish become trained and learn when and where they are fed. Two
      feedings per day are normal. Half of the daily amount is given about
      mid-morning and half in the early afternoon.
      RULE 2:          Never overfeed the fish
      Give only as much feed as the fish will consume in 20 minutes or less.
      Uneaten feed will pollute the water and increase the cost of raising
      your fish. When accumulated uneaten feed decomposes water may
      become low in dissolved oxygen. In such ponds, fish will usually be
      seen at the pond surface in the predawn hours gulping air. They will
      die if the oxygen concentration in the water becomes too low. Steps
      must be taken to exchange or aerate the pond water. Feeding should be
      temporarily suspended when dissolved oxygen is low to improve
      water quality.
      Signs of overfeeding are listed below.
1.    An obvious inability of the fish to consume all of the feed
      offered within a 20-minute period. A farmer can walk into the
      feeding area of his pond 20 minutes after feeding and feel the
      pond bottom. If a large amount of feed is stirred up, too much
      feed is being offered. Feed may also be placed on trays or plat
      forms, which are lowered into the water. These platforms can
      then be pulled up after feeding to determine the quantity of feed
      consumed.
2.    A foul smell in the water when the bottom sediments are disturbed. A
      handful of bottom sediment picked up from the feeding area should not
      be black and foul smelling.
3.    An overabundance of phytoplankton. Overfeeding can make
      plankton become so abundant that a submerged object can only be
      seen at depths less than 25cm. This should be a warning sign to
      farmers that indicates possible overfeeding.


                                   23
RULE 3:         Do not feed on harvest day
Stop feeding fish 24 to 48 hours before they are harvested. This allows them to
clean their intestines and makes them better able to survive the stress of
handling and transportation. It will also save feed.

RULE 4 Regulate feed quantities at cold season
The daily ration for fish should be halved during cold season (<20 c temperature)
                                                                       o




Most fish will not feed on floating pellets at such season, continuous feed addition to
the pond, since there will be low feed utilization.
At such periods sinking pelletes are preferable. Most tropical fish are off-feed
when temperature is below 20 c   o




                                          24
                           Bibliography
1.   Aduku,.A.O (1992). Practical Livestock Feeds Production in the
     tropics. Asekome and Co.Publishers, Zaria.

2.   Bolorunduro P.I (1994) Feeding and Management of Fish in P o n d s .
     Technical Paper for training of ADP Subject Matter Specialists in
     Monthly Technology Review Meetings.

3.   Bolorunduro P.I. (1995) Practical Method of Formulating Com
     pounded Feeds using Locally Available Ingredients for Small Scale
     Producers of Poultry and Fish. Technical paper for training of
     ADP Subject Matter Specialists in Monthly Technology Review
     Meetings.

4.   Eyo. A.A. (1996). Fish Feed Formulation NIFFR Extension
     Guide Series NO. 4. In collaboration with GTZ and NAERLS.

5    Eyo. A.A. (1996). Feeding Practices in Fish Farming. NIFFR
     Extension Guide Series NO. 7. In collaboration with GTZ and
     NAERLS.

6    ICA (1991) International Centre for Aquaculture and Aquatic
     Environments. Feeding your Fish. Water Harvesting Manuals.
     GTZ. Auburn University.




                                 25
