             FISH CULTURE IN PONDS



                 Extension Bulletin No. 103


                    Fisheries Series No 4




                       Published By




National Agricultural Extension And Research Liaison Services
   Federal Ministry of Agricultural and Natural Resources
                  Ahmadu Bello University
                     P.M.B. 1067, Zaria
                           Nigeria.


                            1999
                        ACKNOWLEDGEMENT

        Relevant scientific information pooled together for this bulletin were
sourced mainly from the National Institute For Freshwater Fisheries Research
(NIFFR) New Bussa, special thanks go to NIFFR’s for assistance in providing
the needed results of their research work. Other authors indexed in the
bibliography are greatly acknowledged.
        The support of the Director and Management of NAERLS, the
painstaking work of the Publication Review Committee of NAERLS, and the
efforts of the Publication and Publicity Programme all combined made this
bulletin production possible.



                              Bolorunduro P.I.
                             TABLE OF CONTENT
      Acknowldgment................................................................          2
      Table of Contents...............................................................       3
1.0   Introduction........................................................................   4
2.0.  Pond Culture Systems........................................................           4
      2.1.    Construction design..............................................              4
      2.2.    Level of Management Input..................................                    8
      2.3.    Fish culture practices............................................             8
      2.4.    Scale of production...............................................             10
3.0.  Commonly cultured fish species......................................                   10
4.0.  Site Selection....................................................................     13
      4.1.    Homestead Fish pond............................................                13
      4.2.    Commercial Fish Farm..........................................                 13
5.0.  Land survey and fish farm design.....................................                  15
6.0.  Hints on pond construction..............................................               16
7.0.  Pond Fertilization..............................................................       17
8.0.  Stocking............................................................................   18
9.0.  Liming Practices...............................................................        21
10.0. Feeding pond fish.............................................................         24
11.0. Control of diseases/predators..........................................                26
12.0. Cropping/Harvesting pond fish........................................                  28
13.0. Keepng farm records.......................................................             29
      Bibliography......................................................................     31




                                                    2
1.0. Introduction
Fish culture involves the controlled cultivation and harvesting of fish for either
family consumption or sales in the market. Although fish culture is over thirty
years old in Nigeria, it is yet to develop relatively when compared with arable
agriculture and livestock production.
A wide range of practices exist in culturing fish. Fish can be cultured in marine
(sea water), brackish (mixture of sea and freshwater i.e. lagoons) or freshwater
(rivers, streams and lakes in the inland), Depending on the facilities designed
to serve as enclosures in rearing, fish can be grown in earthen ponds, concrete
tanks, cages, pens, or run-ways. The level of mangement practices can make a
fish farm to be extensive or intensive system. When species combinations are
taken into consideration, culture systems can be either monoculture (rearing
only one type of fish) or polyculture (rearing two or more species of fish
together).
A fish pond is an enclosure (earthen or concrete) built to retain water for the
purpose of growing fish. Wooden troughs, fibre glass and plastic tanks are
other media of growing fish. Growing fish in ponds from which they cannot
escape allows feeding, breeding, growing and harvesting of the fish in a well-
planned way.

2.0. POND CULTURE SYSTEMS
Fish ponds can be classified mainly using the following criteria:-
       (a)     Construction design
       (b)     Level of management input
       (c)     Fish culture practices
       (d)     Scale of production
2.1. Construction Design
       1.      Earthen Ponds: These are constructed by digging soil in a
               carefully selected site that is good enough to retain water for
               fish culture. (Figure 1a) Where the soil structure is weak to
               retain adequate water, dug out earthen ponds can be reinforced
               with concrete to make it suitable for fish culture.
                                        3
2.   Conrete/Embarkment Ponds: These are pond constructed on
     the ground, that is above the ground surface with concrete wall
     (Fig. 1b). Concrete ponds can be used to raise fish in a place
     with porous or sandy soil or within living premises.
3.   Barrage Ponds:         This is a type of pond constructed by
     building a wall across a stream running in a low valley. The
     wall ensures enough water retention for fish growth (Fig. 1c)
4.   Diversion Ponds:       Ponds supplied by water diverted from a
     river/stream through a channel are called diversion ponds.
     Such pond, is also known as Relief Pond (Fig. 1d)
5.   Rosary Ponds:        These are ponds built in a string and each
     drains into the other and are all managed as a single unit due to
     their water connection.
6.   Parallel Ponds: These are ponds located in an area with each
     having its own inlet and outlet. (Fig. 1f).




               Figure 1a: Earthen Ponds



                            4
         Fig 1b: Concrete Ponds




Fig 1c: Barrage Ponds




    Fig 1d: Diversion Ponds

                   5
Fig 1e: Rosary System Ponds




    Fig 1f: Barrage Ponds

           6
2.2. Level of Management Input
Depending on the level of management inputs, especially in feeding,
fertilization and liming, pond culture systems can be classified as Extensive,
Semi-Intensive or Intensive.
1.       Extensive Culture System:               When food base in a pond is
exclusively naturally occcuring without supplementation ( either by feeds or
fertilizer), the culture system is an extensive one. This practice is popular with
small-scale producers
2.       Semi-Intensive Culture System           In this system, there is
occasional supplementary feeds addition and natural productivity is
augumented with manures.
3.       Intensive Culture System               This demands a higher level of
management input. Feeds and fertilizers are intensively applied following
appropriate recommended rates. Suitable liming materials like agricultural
lime are also applied to stimulate productivity and disinfect the pond of
parasite and diseases. Fish grow very fast when intensively managed and
grow least in extensive management. Most commerical farms adopt this
approach.
4       Hyper intesive culture system: Th system demands the highest leel of
management inpouts. Ths culture environment is completely under control.
Feeding is totally with highly formulated pellets. Mechanical, and automoted
feeders are used. The main features are intensive recyclatory with biofiltration
tanks. Highest fish yield obtained in this system.
2.2 Fish Culture Practices
Pond can be classified as monoculture or polyculture.
1.       Monoculture: This is the practice of culturing only one species of fish
in a pond unit (Fig. 2a). Under monoculture, a farmer may grow only Clarias
in the pond. He will be able to know more about the management of Clarias
than other fish species.


                                        7
2. Polyculture: This is the practice of culturing more than one species of fish
in the same pond. Fish yield under polyculture (Fig. 2b) can be higher and
foods in the pond properly utilized, since the different fish species exploit
food at different trophic levels.




                                       8
2.4. Scale of Production
1. Homestead/Rackyard Ponds: This is a fish pond that is managed to
augument family protein intake. The size of such a pond could vary according
to land space available e.g. 10m x 10m.
2. Commercial Fish Ponds/Farms: This , usually have an area of land not less
than 0.25 hectare under culture. Such a farm will demand more attention from
the fish farmer, since income generation is the major purpose behind its
establishment. Concrete tanks units of not less than 200m can also be intensive
                                                         2




as commercial ventures.

3.0. COMMONLY CULTURED FISH SPECIES
Generally the purpose of rearing fish is to have enough to eat and generate
additional income especially in commercial farms. Not all fish species
perform creditably well in culture. For a profitable venture, the fish farmer’s
ideal candidate species must have either of these qualities:-
i.      Fast grower e.g. Heterobranchus
ii.     Accept and utilize properly, supplementary feeds e.g. Tilapia
iii.    Must be hardy and resistance to disease, e.g. Clarias
iv.     Must be tolerant to poor water quality e.g. Clarias
v.      The fish must be easy to breed in captivity. E.g. Tilapia
vi.     It must attract low production cost (Tilapia/Clarias)
vii.    Acceptable and marketable to consumers, e.g. Carp Clarias.




                                      9
TABLE:1 Commonly Cultured Fish Species in Freshwater Ponds in Nigeria

 COMMON NAME                       SCIENTIFIC NAME
 Tilapia*                      Oreochromis niloticus (Tilapia nilotica)
                               Tilapia guineensis
                               Tilapia melanopleura
                               Sarotherodon galilaeus
 Mud Cat-fish*                 Clarias (garinpinus)
 Common Carp*                  Cyprinus Carpio
 Spotted Cat-fish**            Synodontis filamentosus
 Red mud cat-fish**            Heterobranchus bi-dorsalis
 Niger perch * *               Lates niloticus
 African bony tongue* *        Heterotis niloticus
 Grey cat-fish* *              Chrysichthys nigrodigitatus
 Trunk-fish* *                 Gymnarchus niloticus
 African Carp* *               Bagrus bayad
 Moon fish* *                  Labeo coubie
 Cat-fish* *                   Citharinus citerus
from the
          Fingerlings readily available in hatcheries
          Fingerlings not readily available in hatcheries, but can be collected
           from the wild.
Source – Ita E,O, 1989.


     TABLE 2: Commonly Cultured Fish Species in Brackish Water
     Ponds
           COMMON NAME               SCIENTIFIC NAME

              Flat head grey mullet *           Mugil cephalus
              Tilapia*                          Tilapia Zilli
                                                Tilapia guinensis
                                                Tilapia melanotheron
              Atlantic Tarpon * *               Megalops atlanticus

              Ten Pounder * *
              (West African Lady fish)          Elops lacerta
              Grey Cat-fish * *                 Chrysichthys nigrodigitatus
              African red Snapper **            Lutjanus agennes

                     Fingerlings and feeds readily available
                     Fingerlings not readily available in hatcheries but can
                      be obtained from the wild.
                     Source - Ita E.O. 1989.


                                           10
In Nigeria, certain fish species are found only in freshwater bodies (that is
rivers and lakes) and do very well under culture (Plate 1). Some other species
inhabit the marine environment, but can be cultured in brackish water
(Lagoons and estuaries) (Plate 2).




                     Plate 1.Fresh water fish species.




                   Plate 2. Brackish water fish species


                                        11
4.0.   SITE SELECTION

4.1. Homestead Fish Pond              For homestead fish culture, the house
backyard is suitable. (Fig. 3). Earthen/Concrete pond can be used for this
purpose. Soil at site of the earthen pond should be able to retain water.




4.2. Commercial Fish Farm              In commercial fish farming, the first
requirement is the choice of a suitable land for the establishment of the farm.
Such a land must be sited near water with suitable topography for pond
construction (Fig. 4). The water source can be river/stream, spring, well or
borehole. The water must be free from pollutants. Water is the medium for
culturing fish; as a result the supply of water must be guaranteed throughout
the culture period. The topography of the land should not be too hilly or too
flat. A slightly depressed marshy land that can retain water for a long time is
ideal for pond construction.




                                      12
                   Fig 4. A typical fish pond in farmland.

Soils that are too porous (sandy soil) or too clayey are not good for fish culture.
In sandy soils, the water retention capacity is very low, while pond soil with
high proportion of clay (above 40% composition) will be turbid
(concentration of suspended solids). This is dangerous for fish. A suitable
soil is that which has a good proportion of clay and loam (i.e. 40%:60%)
simple test of soil for water retention includes the following:-
1. Dig the soil to about 10cm deep and take a soil sample at that depth. Wet a
handful of the earth with water and rub it on the palms. If it forms a continuous
thread, then it can retain water and is good for fish pond construction (Fig. 5).
2. Squeeze a little amount of the moist soil, if it holds shape, them it is good
and suitable for pond (Fig. 5).
3. A bucket full of water can also be poured into the dug hole. If the
percolation rate (rate of disappearance of the water) is fast, (i.e. within 1min)
the site is not good enough for fish pond construction.
Soil experts can also be consulted for analysis in case of large scale farming
with huge capital investment.



                                        13
                Fig 5. Testing good sol for Pond Construction


5.0.    LAND SURVEY AND FISH FARM DESIGN
            Once a suitable land has been acquired, it should be surveyed by a
registered surveyor and a topographic map produced to permit the design of
fish ponds and other structures.
        The design of a fish farm varies with the nature of the land. If the slope
is gentle enough (a good valley of 1:2 slope) to permit chanelling of water
from the stream or river into the farm, the construction of a storage reservoir
may not be necessary. In most gentle sloping valleys, channelization may not
be practicable hence it might be necessary to block the course of water in order
to raise the water level. This is to permit diversion of water into ponds lined
along (parallel to) the course of the river or stream. Such a dam may not
necessarily form a stroage reservoir suitable for fish production because of the
fast flowing nature of the river during the flood season and the difficulty of
screening off the fish.


                                       14
  Fig 6. Small vallyes with gentle slope have excellent potential for pond
                               construction

6.0.    HINTS ON POND CONSTRUCTION
          After conducting a feasibility study and planning on the type and size
of pond to build on the site selected, construction work can start (refer to
NAERLS Bulletin Fish Pond Site Selection and Construction for details).
Depending on the nature of the surrounding land, the construction could be
manual or mechanical. In marshy lands, the use of heavy aquipment is not
advisable. The is due to the risks and difficulties of using such equipment in
those kinds of terrain. Construction of a large farm may require the services of
an Aquaculture Engineer or a Technical expert from any Fisheries institution.
        The main parts of any fish pond to be constructed are the dam walls
(dikes), the water inlet and outlet system (Fig.7). Pond dikes must be well
compacted to prevent leakages. Concrete ponds are preferable in areas where
the soil is too sandy for earthen ponds or enough land is not available or the
pond is required within the living premises. Cost of construction of concrete
ponds vary with the size of pond, location, availability and cost of labour,
source of water and cost of inputs such as cements, sand, gravel, plastic pipes,
solid blocks, etc.

                                      15
7.0.    POND FERTILIZATION
           Two types of fertilizers can be used for pond fish culture. These are
organic manures and inorganic or agricultural fertilizers. Application rates of
these fertilizers are shown in Table 3.
Fertilizer helps in enriching water nutrients for plankton production on which
fish feed. There should be regular application of fertilizer to keep the water
colour green. Bright green colour incates that the pond is fertile (rich in
organic nutrients).Deep green colour of ponds water indicates over fertility. A
farmier should guide against excessive fertilizer/manure application. To
avoid depletion of dissolved oxygen in pond water The consequence of such
is massive fish death.




                                      16
   TABLE 3:    Recommended Fertilizer Application Rate in Ponds
      FERTILIZER TYPE       APPPLICATION                       COMMENTS
                            RATE
    ORGANIC
    1. Cow Manure           500kg/ha/month              3,000kg/ha to be applied to bottom
                                                        of new ponds before filling, if
                                                        possible.
    2. Poultry Manure       112-224kg/ha/wk             Or 1,000 ducks per ha. In combined
                                                        culture or 350 layers per ha.
                                                        Or 100 pigs/ha at ratio of 1:3 males
    3. Pig Manure           560-1680kg/ha/week          to females in combined culture.

    INORGANIC
    1. Basic slag (15% of       36kg/ha/month            To be applied one week after
         0
       P2 5)                                             application of lime.
    2. Triple Super
       Phosphate (T.S.P)        60kg/ha/month            Applied twice monthly

    3. Ammonium Sulphate        300-400kg/ha/month       Applied twice monthly
       (A.S.)
                                                         To be applied monthly for four
    4. Mixture of TSP and     133-238kg/ha/month         months
    A.S.
         Source - Ita E. O. 1989.




8.0.    STOCKING
Stocking is the introduction of fish (fingerlings or adult fish) into the new pond
environment. Two sources of stocking are possible. Fish can be collected
from the wild (rivers, streams, lakes, etc) or from hatcheries/existing fish
ponds where fish are already adapted to culture condition. The closer the
source of getting the fish to the pond, the better; to reduce to the bearest
minimum fish mortality during transportation. Fish should be collected with
the water of the environment they have been used to. Hardy fish species like
Clarias and Hetero branchus can be transported in plastic basins over a short
and fair distance (Fig. 8). For longer distances, fish fingerlings should be
transported in polythene bags containing water and oxygen (Fig. 9).


                                              17
              Figure 8. Containers for fish transportation




    Fig 9. Polythene bag filled with water and oxygen used for fish
                             transportation

Test stocking (pre-stocking) should be practised by introducing few
fish into the new environment. Test stocking period range from two days to


                                   18
one week. If the fish survive well, then the pond can be fully stocked.
        Recommended stocking rate of fish (ratio of one species to another or
male to female) and stocking density (number of fish per square metre of pond
water) to avoid over-crowding, should be practised.              This will ease
management problems and enhance the success of the fish culture. Some
combination of fish under culture in Nigeria are shown in Table 4.

     TABLE 4: Species Combination and Recommen ded Stocking Rates (Fingerlings) per
     hectare.
                                        Freshwater            Brackish Water

1.     MONOCULTURE
          Tilapia spp.                        10,000 - 20,000          10,000 - 20,000
          Clarias (mudfish)                    3,000 - 5,000                  -
          Heterotis                              500 - 1,000                  -
          Carp                                  3,000 - 6,000                 -
          Migil species                               -                10,000 - 20,000
          Grey Cat fish                         7,000 - 8,000                 -
       2. POLYCULTURE
          Tilapia + Carp                       2,000 – 3,000+2500                -
          Tilapia + Clarias                   40,000- 6,600                      -
          Tilapia + Tarpon                           -                    6,000 + 4,500
          Tilapia + Mulet                             -                    8,000 + 10.000
          Tilapia + Mugil                             -                  10,000 + 10,000
          Tilapia + Mugil +                           -
          Grey Cat Fish                               -                  10,000 +2,500+1,000

     Source: DFRRI 1988 Note stocking density can be quite higher under intensive recycling
     system




                                                  19
9.0.    LIMING PRACTICES
        (a) What is Liming?
        Liming is the process of application of agricultural/industrial limes to
        fish ponds. If pond soils/or water are not acidic, liming may not be
        necessary. Soil and water may be tested in a laboratory or with a water
        analysis kit to determine whether liming is required.

         (b) Why Should A Pond Be Limed?
                 Liming of fish ponds is important for the following reasons:-
1.   Lime corrects the acidity of pond water to the suitable PH range(Hydrogen
     Ion Concentration). A of 5 – 9 is considered suitable for fish gro
2.   Lime makes available phosphorus added in fertilizer for plant use.
     Phosphorus promotes the growth of algae (the microscopic plants) which
     are the base of natural fish food production in ponds.
3.   Lime acts as disinfectants of pond bottom, especially in newly constructed
     ponds or ponds in fallow.
4.   Lime helps in reducing water turbidity i.e. in settling soil particles in
     muddy ponds.

        (c) How to Apply Lime
        Lime can be applied to pond bottom before impoundment (in filling
        with water) or to a flooded pond.
        Pre-Impoundment Application
        The following steps should be followed in applying lime to a
        prepared pond.
i. If lime is in lumps, break the lumps to fine powder by matching on the
     bag.
ii. Spread the lime evenly on the pond bottom (Fig. 10)
iii. A disc harrow or rake can be used to mix the lime with the pond soil
     manually.



                                      20
Precaution
1. Wear protective clothes and shoes (preferably rain boots) in applying
   lime to pond bottom.
2. As much as possible, avoid inhaling the lime dust. This is dangerous to
   health.
3. After application, take a bath.

Post-Impoundment Application.
If the pond is already infilled with water, then take the following steps.
1. Tie the mouth of the sack containing the lime material.
2. Tie the bag to a pole and allow the lime to sip freely into water (Fig.
     11).
3. After about 48 hours (2 days) retrieve the sack from the pond. By this
     time, the lime material must have sipped completely into the pond.



                                    21
(d) Liming Materials Good For Fish Ponds
These include:-
1. Limestone/Agricultural lime – CaCO    3


2. Caustic/slacked or hydrated lime - Ca(OH)    2


3. Quicklime – CaO
Agricultural lime is the best liming material for fish pond. It is also the
cheapest and readily available. They are by-products of cement factories and
can be obtained from such places.
(e)     Liming Rates
The recommended liming rate using agricultural lime is shown below in Table
5.




                                    22
TABLE 5: LIMING RATES OF POND USING AGRICULTURAL LIME

  SOIL TYPE            NEW PONDS                   OLD PONDS

  1.   Clay soil       1680 - 2240kg/ha/year       1120kg/ha/year

  2.   Sandy soil      1120 - 1680kg/ha/year       560 - 1120kg/ha/year


       Source: DFRRI (1988)
10.0. FEEDING OF POND FISH
Fish feed on a variety of foods. These include food produced from the natural
pond environment and feeds given as supplement to the pond.

 (a) Natural Fish Foods
Living organisms are natural fish foods and they are produced in the water
where the fish live.       Phytoplankton (microscopic plants), zooplankton
(microscopic animals), and large aquatic organisms like insects, crustacea,
molluscs, and aguatic plants are all examples of natural foods (Fig. 12)
Fertilization increases their abundance..




             Fig 12. Lager aquatic organisms consumed by fish


                                     23
 (b)Supplementary Feeds
When natural foods are not availanble in sufficient quantity to provide
adequate nutrition for fish growth, feeds that are manufactured or grown
outside of the fish pond may be fed at regular intervals (daily, weekly, etc).
These feeds supplement natural foods. Supplementary feeds should include
finely divided artificiel food like egg yoke, bloodmeal, fish meal, shrimp
flour, bean flour, oil cakes, bone meals, cereal brans, etc. Adult fish prefer
feeds available in pellet form. Sinking pellets are more suitable to bottom
feeders like Clarias and Heterotis spp., while for Tilapia, floating pellets are
suitable. Pelleted feed of not more than 3.2mm in diameter is suitable for fish
species. It is recommended to feed fish with pellets since the whole nutrients
in the food will be readily taken by the fish. Good quality feed for fish
farming purpose should have the following proximate composition.
                 -       Protein      -          35%
                 -       Minerals and Vitamins 32 – 33%
                 -       Fat          -          11%
                 -       Carbohydrate             6 - 10%
Feed ingredients should be free of toxicants, e.g. Haemagglutinins in raw
soyabeans and Gossypol in cotton seed meal. These toxicants can be removed
by roasting the feed stuffing redients. The following are hints for feeding fish
in ponds:
1.      In polyculture, the feeding habits of fish species stocked should be
        considered. A combination of species like Tillapia, Clarias and
        Heterotis in the same pond will require sinking and floating
        pellets/crushed meals.
2.      Feed fish at definite points in the pond. This will make the fish to
        respond more to feeding spots.
3.      Feed fish on daily basis – best times are morning before 7.00 am and
        evening around 6.00pm. Irregular feeding will retard the growth rate
        of fish.
4.      Avoid overstocking of pond with feeds. Overstocking can result


                                      24
in water pollution and death of fish. Feed fish according to the recommended
rates.
The recommended feed formular in preparing varying percentages of rich
protein feeds is as shown in Table 6.
Table 6:        Feed Formulae for Preparing Feeds of Various Crude Protein Levels

                Using Locally Available Feed Ingredients.

  %         Palm     Corn Bran    Rice Bran   Fish          Soya    G/nut     Total
  Crude     Kenel    (kg)         (kg)        Meal          bean    Cake      Weigh
  Protei    Cake                              (kg)          Meal    (kg)      t (kg)
  n         (kg)                                            (kg)
  20        45.30    45.30        -           3.1           3.1     3.1       99.99
  20        -        35.80        35.80       -             11.20   11.20     100.00
  35        -        24.0         24.0        17.3          17.3    17.3      99.99
  40        21.2     21.2         -           19.2          19.2    19.2      100.00
Source – NIFFR 1989. Annual Report..


11.0       CONTROL OF DISEASES AND PREDATORS
           (a) Common Fish Diseases
               Fish diseases       are caused mostly by fish parasites.
               Maintaining a hygienic pond environment is the best
               preventive method of checking diseases outbreak. Diseases
               can occur in fish pond due to:-
               1.     Overcrowding, i.e. high density stocking.
               2.     Poor water quality resulting in fish kill
               3.     Erratic feeding practices. Starved fish are highly
                      susceptible to diseases attack.
               4.     Intrusion of predators into the pond. Most predators
                      act as intermediate host to fish parasites.
               5.     Over fertilization of pond water leading to high density
                      algal bloom can reduce the amount of dissolved
                      oxygen (DO), affecting fish health.

                                              25
               Broadly, diseases can be classified into:-
               i.     Bacterial and viral
               ii.    Fungal
               iii.   Protozoan
               iv.    Worms
               v.     Crustacean
               vi.    Environmental, and
               vii.   Nutritional
(A) Fish Fredators
Predators are natural enemies of fish. Common fish predators that should be
prevented from causing fish losses in ponds include water snakes, turtles,
frogs, water birds (king fisher and water duck, etc), crocodiles, crabs, etc.
Wild carnivorous fish intruding into ponds are also predators and as such
should be prevented.
       1. Ensure regular clearing of pond site. Predators hide in bushes.
       2. As much as possible, the farmer should fence the pond site.
       3. Most aquatic predators get into the pond through flood water.
       Measures should be taken to protect the pond from flood water.
       4. Hunt the predators, using traps or point blank killing.
Common fish diseases, causative factors or agents, symptoms and treatment
recommended are highlighted in Table 7.




                      Fig. 13 Some common Predators of fish


                                      26
   Table 7: Common Fish Diseases, Causative Agents, Symptoms and Recommended Treatment
DISEASE              CAUSATIVE                SYMPTOMS             TREATMENT
                     FACTOR/AGENT
1. Bacterial
   Infectious        Pseudomonas Puntata      Swelling of belly    Antibiotic such as
   abdominal dropsy                                                chloramphenicol. 1gm/kg of
   (I.A.D.)                                                        feed or 5ml injection


2.   Fungal
a)   Gill or              Branchimyces            Red spots on the gill      Avoid dense stocking.
     Branchiomyiosis      anguimis                                           Remove affected fish.
                                                  Appears as fussy,          Isolate the fish and treat
b) Saprolegnia            Saprolegnia             grey whitish               with CuS04 dust.
   infection                                      blotches on skin


3.   Protozoan
     Ichtyophthirriasis   Icthyophthirius         Red patches on gill        Difficult to treat when
                                                  & skin                     parasites are in the dermis.
                                                                             Drain & lime the pond.
4.   Worm Diseases
a)   Fish Leeches         Piscicola geomatra      Skin covered with          Drain the pond. Put fish in
                                                  the leach cause            solution of 1m1 Lysol and
                          Dactylogyrus vastator   excessive weakness         5l of water for 5 seconds.
b)   Fish Fluke                                                              Drain the pond. Treat fish
                                                  Gills swells and turn      in salt solution of 25gm per
                                                  grey                       litre of water for 10 seconds.
5.   Disease Caused.
     By Crusacean
     Argutus Infection    Argutus foliaceus       The string of the          Drain and lime pond. Treat
                                                  fish lice cause red        fish in solution of KMn04
                                                  patches on the fish        or Lysol both 1gm/1tr. Of
                                                  skin                       water for 40 seconds.
6.   Environmental
     Diseases                                                                    Apply 500kg of a
a)   Acidic water         Low PH below 5          Fish skin covered with         CaCo3ha/ha of pond.
                                                  whitish film, gills turn
                                                  brownish. Mortality of
                                                  fish
                                                                                 Apply lime in a
b) Alkaline water         High PH above 9         Mortality of fish              sufficient quantity
                                                                                 according to PH level.

                                                                                 Drain pond and change
                                                                                 water
b) Low DO                 Asphyxia                Fish regularly come out
                                                  to gasp for atmospheric        Aerate the pond if
                                                  air.                           device is available or
                                                  Mass mortality of fish         flush fresh water by
                                                  with wide open mouth           high velocity into the
                                                  and gillss wide apart.         pond
                          Enteritis               If abdomen is pressed          Use balance diet fed
7.   Nutritional                                  lightly a yeloow-red           with high proportion of
     Disease                                      liquid flows from the          protein or vitamin to
                                                  anus Intestine is red          correct nutritional
                                                  congested and highly           deficiency.
                                                  inflamed




                                                     27
12.0. CROPPING (HARVESTING) POND FISH
      In fish pond culture system, three types of cropping are practised in
      routine management.
      (a)     Test cropping
      (b)     Partial harvest
      (c)     Total pond harvest
      (A) Test Croping: Fish pond should be test cropped routinely to
      monitor fish growth and health. After examination, test cropped fish
      should be returned to the pond water. A scoop net is suitable for test
      cropping (Fig. 14). Wounding gears e.g Gull not should not e used for
      test harvesting.




                       Figure 14 - A Scoope Net for Test Harvesting


(B) Partial Harvesting When different age group of the same fish species or
different species combination are reared together in pond, the fish are bound to
mature to table sizes at different times. Partial harvest of pond should be done
with appropriate mesh size. Matured fish can be selected for market sale or
family consumption while undersized ones should be returned to the pond.
Periodical harvesting of pond fish enables a farmer to generate revenue
periodically. Draw net is most suitable for harvesting pond fish.

                                       28
(C) Total Harvest: Ponds that have been used to rear fish for over 10 years
can be totally drained and the whole fish harvested. Total pond harvest from
management point of view can be carried out at the end of a production cycle
or in cases of emergency like diseases outbreak. A Draw Net or Drag Net is
most suitable for total cropping of pond fish. (Fig. 15). Nets should be
cleaned and spread in the sun to dry after each harvesting operation. This is to
preserve and prolong their operational life span.




       Figure 15 - Nets are frequencly used to harvest ponds

13.0. KEEPING FARM RECORDS
It is important for prospective fish farmers to keep record of events and
statement of expenditures and income throughout the production cycle of
the fish pond.




                                      29
(a)   The Log Book This should contain information on the following:-
1.    Location of fish pond
2.    Nature of soil at site
3.    Pond ownership type (whether private, cooperative/communal)
4.    Pond area and depth
5.    Sources of water supply
6.    Date of commencement of construction
7.    Date of completion of construction
8.    Thickness of dam wall
9.    Agricultural/Economic activities practised around
10.   Date of pond impoundment
11.   Sources of Fingerlings/breeders
12.   Stocking rate
13.   Species of fish stocked
14.   Date of stocking
15.   Water analysis result (where possible)
16.   Fertilizers applied/fertilization practice
17.   Limes/liming practices
18.   Supplementary feeds applied, including sources and forms (i.e.
      pellets or grounded).
19.   Water management practices
20.   Diseases identified
21.   Record of fish mortality
22.   Staff strength on farm
23.   Number of days of contact with advisors, i.e. Extension/Research
      staff.
(B)   Total Expenditure This includes cost.
      i.       Fixed Cost
      1.       Land
      2.       Pumps/Tanks and farm equipment
      3.       Farm structures
      4.       Brood stocks.
                                 30
       ii.     Variable Cost
       1.      Fish seed
       2.      Fertilizers
       3.      Limes
       4.      Feeds
       5.      Labour/maintenance
       6.      Medication
       7.      Transportation
       8.      Consultancy

(c) Income Statement
Income projection/record can be conclusive after harvest. Financial analysis
for project profitability can be easily arrived at with proper records of
expenditure and income.
For details on profitability estimation, refer to NAERLS Extension Bulletin
No 107, Economics of Aquaculture Production.



BIBLIOGRAPHY
Annual Report 1989. National Institute for Freshwater Fisheries Research,
        New Bussa, Nigeria 45p
Bard. J.P., et. al. 1976. Hand Book of Tropical Fish Culture. Centre
        Technique forestier Tropical, France 165p.
Ita E.O. 1980. Principles and practices of integrated commercial fish farming
        in Nigeria. Technical report series No. 19, National Institute for
        Freshwater Freshwater Fisheries Research, New Bussa.
Viveen W.J.A., et. al. 1986. Practical manual for the Culture of African
        Catfish (Clarias gariepinus) 93P.


                                     31
