HERD HEALTH MANAGEMENT IN FARM ANIMALS




               Extension Bulletin No: 198
                Livestock Series No: 21



                     Produced and Distributed By




 NATIONAL AGRICULTURAL EXTENSION AND RESEARCH LIAISON SERVICES
                   AHMADU BELLO UNIVERSITY
                            P.M.B. 1067
                         ZARIA NIGERIA.




                               2000
                  ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS


This bulletin on Herd Health Management was a compilation
of several years of work resulting from series of workshop
paper presented to Agricultural development project (ADP) at
their monthly technology review meetings. ADP request on this
topic ranges from principles of disease prevention, identifying
sick animals, taking basic herd health parameters to
management of emergencies. The initial works done by Dr. T
Balogun of the NAERLS and all other references cited towards
the making of this bulletin are duly acknowledged.


                                     A. I. Annatte
                                TABLE OF CONTENTS

Acknowledgements.......................................................................
2
Table of Contents.......................................................................... 3
Introduction .................................................................................. 4
Early Signs of Sickness................................................................ 5
Methods of confirming Sick animals........................................ 6
Taking Body Temperature........................................................... 7
Taking pulse rate.......................................................................... 8
Observing respiratory rates........................................................ 8
Giving First Aid on the farm. ..................................................... 9
Taking care of Minor ailments.................................................... 9
Bleeding........................................................................................ 9
Wounds...........................................................................................10
Taking care of Broken horn.........................................................11
Taking care of abscesses.............................................................12
Removing foreigne bodies from the eye.....................................12
Helping animal with choke......................................................... 14
Helping animal with bloat.............................................................14
Emergencies.................................................................................15
Parasites and parasitism..............................................................16
Ticks and Tick born diseases......................................................16
Trouble caused by worms.............................................................17
Disease Control By Joint Effort: ................................................19



                                                      2
INTRODUCTION:
        Animals like human beings need to have good health before they can
perform very well. The performance could be in milk production in dairy
animals, meat in beef cattle, sheep and goat. The performance could also be the
strength to pull farm implement as in work bull. So irrespective of what use an
animal is put to, it must be in good health before it can perform the job.

Animals can fall sick because of a number of reasons. Sickness in animals
could be due

   (1)      Inadequate feeding- too little or too much or due to absence of
            certain ingredients in the feed.
    (2)     It could be due to adverse environmental conditions such as
            exposure to extreme cold or heat.
    (3)     Germs such as bacteria or virus, which gain entrance into the
            animals’ body causing bodily harm, can cause disease or sickness.
    (4)     Parasites (internal and external) can be the cause of sickness in
            farm animals.
    (5)     Disease can also be caused by loss of body fluid or it may be due to
            too little or excessive secretion of some very important body
            secretions.
Diseases caused by bacteria, viruses, fungi etc. referred to as infectious
disease are the most important disease of livestock and are the ones that most
threaten increased livestock production in Nigeria.

Disease prevention or maintenance is an essential part of good livestock
management practices. Animals are usually reared together in large numbers
in one place. It is recognized that most important Livestock diseases spread
easily and rapidly among animals that live close to each other.


                                       3
Disease prevention should take cognizance of this by preventing disease on a
herd basis. The herdsman should always be alert to signs of sickness in herd.
This bulletin is intended to teach you how to keep watch on the heath status of
your herd.

METHODS OF DISEASE PREVENTION

Disease prevention starts with good management. This includes:

(1)     Starting with a healthy flock and ensuring new animals to be
        introduced to the herd are disease free.
(2)     Adequate feeding with clean water, balance diet
(3)     Adequate housing
(4)     Maintaining good hygiene and sanitation in the flock.
(5)     Following the recommended preventive measures such as Vaccination
        programmes, de-worming, spray or dust against ecto-parasite,
        Quarantine etc.

Early signs of sickness

1.   Sick animals frequently separate themselves from their mates during
    grazing. A sick animal can be seen lagging behind or taking shelter under a
    tree shade while others are busy grazing.
2. A sick animal may put up abnormal appearance or posture. It may appear
    dull or dejected. May show rather awkward gait or movement. The coat
    may appear rough, losing the normal glossy appearance.
3. The tail may carry heavy feacal contamination or discharge from the
      genital organ.




                                      4
4. Usually a sick animal responds poorly to an external stimulus. The normal
    attitude should be one of alertness. If disturbed the response should be
    reasonably quick.
5. Strong smelling faeces or urine and traces of blood in the feaces or urine are
    signs of something going wrong.
6. Abnormalities of milk either in amount, physical appearance or in the smell
    are indications of disorder.
7. Heavy breathing by an animal that has not worked is a sign of imminent
    danger.

   It must however be stressed that it is not in all cases that the signs are
   apparent and distinct. In some cases it may be necessary to perform some
   tests before it is possible to detect a sick animal. It is also noteworthy that
   some animals may harbour some disease causing agents without
   necessarily showing any sign of disease. But they may transmit the disease
   to other animals in the flock.

   It is therefore necessary that constant checks for signs of sickness and
   carrying out certain tests to determine presence of a disease in an animal
   population is necessary.

   Method of confirming a sick animal
       Though animals cannot talk, an experienced farmer can easily pick a
   sick animal in a flock. There are behaviors that sick animal express to
   indicate to the stockman that all is not well with his animal. While some of
   the signs are obvious even to the uninformed, others require trained
   eyes and experience to detect.




                                       5
If a farmer suspects that one or few of his animals are dull and out of normal
expected behaviors, there are a few preliminary health checks he can carry out
to confirm that the animal is sick.

1. Taking Temperature:
A healthy animal maintains a constant internal body temperature irrespective
of temperature of the external environment. The temperature of the animal’s
body is therefore very useful in determining its health status. An instrument
called thermometer can determine the temperature of the animal’s body.

For practical purposes the normal temperature of farm animals are:

       v Horse                     380C
                                     0
       v Cattle                    39 C
       v Sheep                     400C
                                       0
       v Goat                      40.6 C
                                     0
       v Pig                       39 C

A high temperature is one of the classical signs of fever and is seen in acute
cases of infectious diseases.

Drop in temperature may be the result of loss of blood, starvation, and coma or
certain long lasting diseases.




                                      6
2. Taking Pulse Rate:

        The rate at which the heart is beating. The pulse rate can be influenced
by the state of the animal’s health- faster in fevers and slower and weaker in
wasting diseases.

        The normal pulse rates for farm animals are:
        1.     Horse                   36 - 42 per min.
        2.     Cow                     45 – 50 per min.
        3.     Sheep/goat/pig          70 – 80 per min.

3. Observe the respiratory rate

         This is the breathing rate of the animal. Many factors can influence the
breathing rate of the animal. It is faster during temperature rise, Fever or after
vigorous exercise. It is also slower in certain disease condition in which body
activities are slowed down as in milk fever. The respiration rate can be
determined by counting the number of chest movement per minute.

        Normal respiratory rate for farm animals are:

        Horse                             8 - 12 per min.
        Cow                              12 – 16 per min.
        Sheep/ goat                      12 – 20 per min.
        Pig                              10 – 16 per min.

        The preliminary health checks are all a herdsman is expected to do to
determine whether an animal is sick or not. These compliment his ability to
make simple observation to know when an animal changes its appearance,
posture, and personality. Ability to detect signs of ill health and do some
preliminary health checks helps him to decide when to seek veterinary
assistance.

                                        7
Though treatment of sick animals should be left in the hands of veterinarians,
owners of livestock or their assistants should be able to tackle some minor
health problems on the farm, like giving first aid treatment for injuries, care of
newborn calves to prevent infection or helping a cow to deliver.

FIRST AID ON THE FARM
        The first aid given by the farmer is very necessary. It may serve to
arrest further blood loss, to reduce pain or prevent shock or it may serve to
make the animal comfortable before veterinary help can be rendered.

1.      Taking care of minor ailments

a)      Bleeding:

         An animal may have run through a barbed wire or may have been
inflicted with an injury that may cause bleeding. The bleeding may be mild or
severe depending on the type of vessel damaged.
         The first thing to do in controlling further blood loss is to secure the
animal in such a manner that the wounded area is easily accessible and that the
animal may not injure itself or the persons around. In all cases it should be
remembered that the more an animal is allowed to struggle the more excited it
becomes, the more severe is the bleeding and the greater the difficulty in
controlling it. The animal must therefore be properly restrained. To stop bleed
ing make a pad of cotton wool or gauze or even handkerchief moistened in
water or preferably solution of salt and water and hold it firmly over the wound
until a bandage can be applied to keep the pad in position to stop blood flow. Of
measures that check blood loss by indirect pressure, the use of tourniquet is the
most effective. This can be improved from a piece of soft rope, a length of
bandage etc. A loop is formed around the limb above the wound and twisted up
tight enough to stop the bleeding. It must not be left on for longer than 24
minutes.


                                        8
         In some severe bleeding it may be necessary to replace the blood lost.
This procedure is referred to as blood transfusion. A veterinarian must do this
when you considered it a viable economic option.

b) Wounds:

        A wound may be defined as any break in the continuity of the tissue of
the body. It is usually produced by violence. Wounds are of different types and
kinds according to their causes and nature of the effect produced. Examples are
contusion, Puncture etc.

       The first aid treatment for wounds should consist of
       (a)      Securing the animal and preventing it from further injuring
                itself.
       (b)      Arresting blood loss.
       (c)      Cleaning the wound and applying dressings etc. The wound
                must be prevented from infection.




                                      9
Cleaning the wound: -       The hair around the edges of the wound
should be clipped along with any torn or lacerated portion of skin or
other tissue. A sharp, blunt – pointed scissors must be used. The
wound must have been packed with cotton wool soaked in warm
water to prevent contamination of the raw surface. The area around
the wound may be washed with water containing antiseptics such
as Dettol, T. C. P etc. A protective bandage may be put on the
wound. Dusting with sulphonamide powder is a wise precaution
especially where wounds cannot be bandaged. Injection of wide
spectrum antibiotic (one that can kill many types of germs) such as
Terramycin is often necessary. Temperature of the animal should
be taken daily and if there is any rise, antibiotic treatment should be
instituted at once on the advice of your veterinarian.

2.      Taking care of a broken horn:
A cow may have one of the horns broken either during a fight with
another cow or by accident. The first thing to do in the treatment of
horn injury is the control of hemorrhage or bleeding. This may be
affected by tying a cord round the bases of each affected horn in the
manner of a figure of eight first around one-horn root and then
round the other. A stick inserted in this loop and twisted like a
tourniquet will tighten it sufficiently to control the bleeding.
Wounds of the horns are generally not serious once the bleeding is
arrested.
It may be necessary to sprinkle it with boracic powder. When horn
core is dry, Paste it with tar. This keeps off flies and responds well
to treatment.

                                  10
3.      Taking care of an abscess:
        An abscess is swelling containing pus. It is commonly
caused by an infection of pus – producing germs but the presence of
an irritant either chemical or mechanical in the tissue may also be
the cause. Even in many abscesses that are considered of a
mechanical nature such as these caused by pieces of metal, thorns,
splinters etc. in the tissues, thus pus formation is directly due to the
germs that have been introduced.
        When abscess is pointed, incise with a sharp sterilized knife.
Cut upwards away from animal for wound to drain. Smear Vaseline
below the wound to prevent the discharge blistering the skin. Soak
bandage or gauze in a tincture of iodine and insert into the wound
through the incision. The introduction of penicillin and drugs of the
sulphnilamide group is very useful in the treatment of abscesses.

4.     Removing foreign bodies in the eye
       Farm animals especially cattle usually get foreign bodies
lodged in the eyes. The commonest objects, which get into the eyes
are husks of guinea corn, maize, wheat chaff, hay seeds, long hairs
etc. They cause inflammation and a discharge very distressing to
the animals. Occasionally restraining the animal, holding the head
to one side, and lifting the offending body with a clean
handkerchief may remove the object, or the eyelid may be lifted
with one hand and the object removed with a sweeping movement
of a grease brush. A few drops of castor oil may be dropped on to the
eyeball.

                                  11
       If this cannot remove the object it is best to seek veterinary
assistance and have the foreign body removed under a local
anesthesia by means of a camel hairbrush or special forceps.

5.     Helping animal with Choke:
       This is an obstruction to the passage of food through the
pharynx and oesophagus. The obstruction can be partial or
complete.
       Farm animals especially cattle are very fond of attempting to
swallow foreign bodies or masses of food material too large to pass
down the gullet. The result is that the object becomes lodged
somewhere in the gullet, in the throat or perhaps in the chest region.
The object so lodged hinders the free passage of solid or even fluid
food, giving rise to pain and discomfort. If unattended to, the
animal affected may die.
       Cases of choke in farm animals, especially cows and
donkeys, are frequently seen during mango season in the northern
parts of Nigeria.

Signs of choke:
      Generally the first signs one observes in an animal suffering
from choke are off feeding, restlessness, salivation, attempt to free
swallowing and coughing.
      A common characteristic of choke in cattle is the rapid
formation of gas in the rumen and the left side of the abdomen. The
gas production is due to inability of the animal to regurgitate the
stomach gas through the mouth.

                                 12
Treatment of choke:
      In all cases of choke, no matter how simple, the owner
should seek skilled assistance rather than attempt removal of the
offending object.
      The owner’s first aid should be restricted to the use of trocar
or canula. This may be necessary where the degree of abdominal
enlargement is great causing great distress to the animal.

6.     Helping animal with bloat:
       Cases of bloat are frequently encountered in government
and few private farms in Nigeria. Bloat is not commonly seen in
nomadic herds.
       Bloat occurs in cattle, sheep and goats but more common in
cattle. The rumen becomes distended with gas and pressure is
exerted upon the dia- phram. If left untreated the animal eventually
dies from internal organ compression resulting in suffocation or
blood circulatory shock.
       Bloat is due to an excessive accumulation of gases in the
rumen, formed probably by bacteria action. Though the exact cause
of bloat is not known it has been related to excessive feeding of
fresh green leguminous plant in the absence of dry roughage. Other
factors are said to favor bloating. A bloated animal will have a
distended abdomen especially on the left side. The abdomen
gradually becomes tensed and drums. There is an apparent
discomfort. The animal becomes restless and breathes very rapidly.

                                 13
Treatment: If time permits, severe cases should be treated by a
veterinarian. As a first aid measure cattle may be given oil of
turpentine in linseed oil, groundnut oil or Palm oil will equally do
the job.

7.      Emergencies
        In emergency where veterinarian help cannot be sought and
death seems imminent; plunging a sterilized sharp pointed knife
into the left side of the animal can effect relief.
        Drugs that are usually effective for treatment of bloat include
oil of turpentine, antihistamine and carbachol. If bloat is a regular
features on your farm your veterinarian will teach you how to
manage emergencies using any of the relevant drugs.

Control:      In an area where bloat is common it may be necessary
to look at the feed. 1, avoiding sole legumes pasture, can reduce
incidence. 2, feeding dry forage along with pasture, 3, avoid rapid
eating into an empty stomach. A good herdsman will always know
how to prevent this. 4, making water available all the times.

S h o c k:
Shock is a state of physical collapse in animal and it is as a result of
failure of peripheral blood circulation, resulting in abrupt fall in
blood pressure.



                                  14
Longed starvation, heavy parasitism or any other condition that
threatens the life of the animal.

Treatment: Keep the animal warm and comfortable. Give whole
blood transfusion, blood serum or some special preparation such as
glucose dextran etc, may raise blood pressure.

Signs:       In shock from a debilitating disease, the main
symptoms are those of the diseases concerned. In addition, the
animal develops patchy sweat, lies prostrated, and takes no notice
of anything as it has no strength even to lift its head. Breathing is
shallow and almost imperceptible. If shock is due to rapid
excessive blood loss, irregular breathing and pale mucous
membrane are typical signs.

8.     P a r a s i t e s and P a r a s i t i s m:
The effect of parasites and parasitism constitute a very serious
threat to livestock production in Nigeria. The most important
parasitic diseases especially of blood origin are transmitted from
one animal or herd to another by insect vectors. The control of these
parasitic diseases therefore involves.
   1.      Protecting the animals by prophylactic and therapeutic
           treatments using drugs that are effective against the
           specific parasites.
   2.      The control of the vectors.



                                 15
a) T i c k and T i c k - b o r n e diseases:
       The most dangerous tick – borne diseases are heart water
disease, (Cowdriosis), Babesiosis (red water disease),
Anaplasmosis in ruminants and spirochaetosis in poultry. A good
measure for the control of ticks at present is by dipping and
spraying. Other possibilities like vaccination and dusting and back
line tracing are available. The drugs commonly used for dipping
and spraying are pfizona, Gammatox, toxaphene etc. Pfizona is
readily available. It should be diluted 600 times before it is used to
spray cattle or sheep. But always follow the manufacturer’s
instructions.
       It is recommended that spraying and dipping be done weekly
during raining season. Each farm however develops a suitable
regime to suit its purpose based on experience.
b) Trouble caused by worms:
       Worms cause considerable loss to livestock production.
Well-fed animals may harbor worms in their intestines without
showing stricken symptoms. However young animals usually
suffer from worm infestation.
        Signs of worm infestation include anemia, unthriftness and
sudden death. Sheep and goats are especially more prone to worm
infection; several drugs are available for treatment of worm
infection and the choice of one depends on: 1.The type of worm,
2.The age of the animal. However piperazine is recommended for
de-worming young animals of cattle/sheep and pigs. Ranide and
thiabendazole are recommended for older animals.

                                 16
It is necessary for a farmer or a group of farmers in an area to
institute a de-worming programme. The kind of de-worming
program instituted will be determined by the seriousness of the
problem in the area. Your local veterinarian will be in a position to
help design an effective de-worming programme.

National Vaccination Campaign
        Control and prevention of all diseases require the
cooperation of people, the farm owner, his assistants, the farm
laborers, the veterinarians and other livestock owners in the area
for a successful control. Some animal diseases however require the
cooperation and joint effort of more people because of the nature of
their spread. They may be so widely spread that attacking them
early in one place will be a useless effort.
        Diseases like CBPP (Contagious Bovine Pluero-
Pneumonia) is example of an animal disease that requires the
cooperation of not only local livestock owners, Veterinarians etc
but also the cooperation and joint effort of neighboring countries
for its successful control.

This is so because the disease can spread from one place to another
during animals’ movement.
       Such diseases are called communicable diseases. The most
effective method of controlling diseases like CBPP, Rinderpest,
Anthrax, Back quarter, Hemorrhagic septicemia is by vaccination.

                                 17
Importance of group actvities in disease control:
       There is the need for owners of livestock to cooperate with
the government in their attempt to control or eradicate animal
diseases. The various disease control programmes designed by the
government are to help livestock owners to run a profitable
livestock business by eliminating all disease hazards. Livestock
owners must therefore present all their animals for vaccination.

Bibliography

Payne, W.J.A.(1990)Introduction to animal husbandry in the
tropics by 4 edition.
           th




                               18
