    MANGEMENT OF DRUGS AND
          VETERINARY
     EQUIPMENT ON THE FARM

           Extension Bulletin No: 145
           Livestock Series No: 19



               Produced by




NATIONAL AGRICULTURAL EXTENSION AND RESEARCH
               LIAISON SERVICES
           AHMADU BELLO UNIVERSITY
                   P.M.B. 1067
                 ZARIA NIGERIA.

                    2000
             ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The materials for the production of this bulletin have been
compiled from handouts and lecture materials of the
Department of Public Health and Preventive Medicine of the
University of Ibadan on Veterinary Jurisprudence. The
professional suggestions and comments of O.C. Jegede and
Professor G.A.T. Ogundipe of the faculty of Veterinary
medicine during the preparation of this script are very much
appreciated.

                                       A. I. Annatte
                              TABLE OF CONTENTS


Acknowledgement.........................................                              4
Table of Contents...................................................                  5
Introduction.............................................................             6
The Use of Vet. Drugs and Equipment on the
Farm..........................................................................        7
Advantages of Good Drugs and Equipment
on the Farm.......................................................                    7
Precautions on Use of Veterinary Drugs........................                        8
The Nigerian Drug Laws....................................                            8
Handling Veterinary Drugs............................................                 9
      A. Pharmaceutical drugs.............. .....................                     9
      B. Mineral salt licks............................................               11
Care of Veterinary Equipments.......................... ............                  13
Care of Farm Consumables...........................................                   14
Restriction on the Use of Veterinary Drugs..........                                  15
Planning For First Aid on the Farm.....................                               16
Bibliography.......................................................................   16




                                                   2
INTRODUCTION

Definition of drug under these laws include any substances
of vegetable, animal or mineral origin or any preparations or
admixtures thereof which is registered for and used for
treatment of ailments in either human or animals. Drug
preparations could be recommended for either internal or
external body conditions.
        Drugs, Veterinary consumables and equipments are
indispensable aids in the maintenance of hygienic, safe and proper
delivery of routine vet care in farm animals. Most of the cases of drug
abuse recorded in farm animals in the recent years were attributable to
lack of proper knowledge of drug control either by the farmers that use
them or the animal health attendants who render dispensing services
at the farm.
        It is good to know that there are no magic drugs. A fake or drugs
handled carelessly will not give good result. A drug that is abused on
animals is a waste of resources and infringement on the fundamental
right of consumer of your farm produce. The drug needs of your farm
may not be different from time to time but require professionals to help
you determine the dosage require for every situation that call for their
use. It is always good to seek the advice of your local veterinarian.
        If health care equipments on the farm and the pattern of drug
use are to give many years of useful service to you and your animals,
considerable planning has to be made. This bulletin therefore is
intended to help the animal health attendant and livestock owner
understand what choice of drugs are allowed on the farm to be handled
by farmers and how to take care of such drugs and equipments
required to achieve the best of first aid treatment.


                                   3
THE USE OF VET. DRUGS AND EQUIPMENT ON THE FARM

Whatever type of farm you have, your herd health plans
requires the use of one form of equipment or the other. Every
work you do on the farm also requires that you know how to
effectively use your appliances and equipments to achieve
the desired result. Some of the routine husbandry practices
that require one form of equipment or the other are:
   ·   Vaccination schedules
   ·   Routine control of Parasites
   ·   Routine first aid treatments
   ·   Balanced, adequate and effective feeding
   ·   Sanitation and management of the Farm environment
   ·   Veterinary support services.

ADVANTAGES OF GOOD DRUGS AND EQUIPMENT
ON THE FARM
   ·   It enables you to plan and carry out your work on time
       especially with those drugs and chemicals that are needed for
       first aid treatments.
   ·   It enable you invest on what is required on the farm on a more
       regular basis.
   ·   A well-planned farm with an organized first aid helps your
       veterinarian in his routine works.
   ·   It helps veterinarians to create awareness on how to maintain
       veterinary consumables and equipment after every use.




                                  4
PRECAUTIONS ON USE OF VETERINARY DRUGS

1.     Most Veterinary pharmaceuticals like human medicine are
prescription only medicines (POM). They are to be used only on
Doctors advice. The Nigerian law requires you to consult with your
local Veterinarian before you buy any drug for animal use. There is
always one benefit or the other for doing the right thing all time.

2.    Problems that may arise due to indiscriminate use or
abuse include drug resistance and residue builds up on food
animal products. The adverse effect of which could be
transferred to man the final consumer of food animals.
3.     If failure occurs after the right use of drug, you are also expected
to consult your Veterinary doctor immediately for the necessary advise
and supports.

4.    Treated animals should not be slaughtered for human
consumption within 21 days after treatment. Such meat consumed is at
your own risk.

5.      Milk from treated animals should not be consumed within 7 days
after treatment. You should also note that some manufacturers specify
the number of days after which animals treated with their drugs can be
slaughtered for human consumption. It is important to take some of this
advice seriously.

THE NIGERIAN DRUG LAWS
1.     The Nigerian drug laws prohibit fake drugs, either their
sale, or their distribution and their purchase. Hawking of such

                                    5
material is illegal and attracts fine and or terms of imprisonment in the
court of law.

2.     The Nigerian veterinary laws forbid any person or persons who
       is not registered from administering drugs to animal or practice
       Veterinary medicine. People who practice Veterinary medicine
       Illegally are classified as quacks. A quack once identified is
       arrested and prosecuted in the court of law unless he can prove
       it otherwise.

3.     The veterinary law also prohibits sales of unregistered
       veterinary drugs and its distribution. It prohibits counterfeiting of
       known trade name, adulteration of known drugs. Marketing of
       fake drugs. Illegal importation and hawking of drug is illegal.
       Breach of the law attracts a fine, and or imprisonment for five
       years in the court of law.

4.     Legal controls, penalties, sanctions or fine for offenders on
       wrongful usage of drugs in farm animals are contained in the
       following decrees:
A.     They are Pharmacy laws of 1947,
B.     Food and Drug decree of 1974,
C.     The NAFDAC decree of 1993,
D.     Drug and related product decree of 1993
E.     Counterfeit and fake drug provisional act of 1988.

HANDLING VETERINARY DRUGS

A. Pharmaceutical drugs
1. Drugs transportation
When you buy chemicals or drugs for use on the farm, ensure

                                     6
that the containers are in an upward position. If the containers are
bottles, they should be well arranged in cartons. And should not be
stacked. If they are being transported in public van the carton should
have a bold inscription “fragile, Handle with care”. It is also good to
notify your driver at the onset what you are carrying and your right to
carry such medicine in case police officers at the check point may want
clarification from the driver.

2. Storage of veterinary drugs
While on the farm, Veterinary drugs must be stored in cool dry place
with low relative humidity and a temperature not exceeding 25 degree
Celsius. This is very important especially in case of powdery
preparations that deteriorate fast in poor storage conditions. Your Vet
should handle all drugs that require refrigeration and call for them only
when you need them.

Drugs must be stored away from direct sunlight as this may have
adverse effects on the color, viscosity, and may even lead to reduced
potency or outright damage - What a waste of resources!


3. Drug Administration

a.     When handling Veterinary pharmaceutical in a large herd, it is
       desirable to wear protective clothing such as overall, cap,
       gloves, boots, etc. Protective wears are necessary to prevent
       direct drug-body contact.

b.     It is wrong to buy fake or expired rugs. Before you use any drug
       at all always check for the expiry date, any sign of fake
       presentation, color and viscosity etc. When in doubt contact

                                   7
Your local veterinary officer immediately for clarification.
c.     When your doctor administer inject able suspensions on your
       animals, it is important to confirm the withdrawal time from him.
       Once a drug is open for use for the first time, use the remaining
       product within 28 days for optimum effectiveness. Discard and
       bury the unused material thereafter.
d.     In case accidental spillages occur during use, wash the
       affected part of your body with water and soap. And
       apply soothing cream. You should consult your
       physician when in doubt.
e.     Handle all drugs with care. Keep all drugs in safe with
       proper label on their containers. All drugs should be out
       of the reach of children and uninformed personnel. In
       case a drug is accidentally swallowed, induce vomiting
       by any of the normal methods and report to your
       physician immediately.
f.     Injectibles and prescription drugs are to be used by
       professionals. It is a wrong farm practice to inject animals or
       administer drug without veterinary advice. Once you start such
       habits you may find it difficult to stop it. When a drug is wrongly
       administered, either by overdosing or under dosing harm is
       done, the effect of this will manifest much later. Don’t overlook
       such mistake. Seek professional advice all times.

B. Mineral salt licks.
Salt licks are forms of drugs that are required on the farm all the time
and are subject to abuse as a result of careless handling. Mineral salt
licks are basically salts plus other trace elements added together into a



                                    8
formulated compound and pressed into block. It readily provides
animals with minerals salts to maintain their growth, productivity and
metabolism. Beside the fact that they are feed kept on the farm for
animal use all the time, they are different from the conventional feeds
sources, as such should be handled with care. Salt lick is to be licked by
the animal free choice and not added to feed. Salt lick blocks once
damaged should be thrown away. The dust should not be added to
feed.

Characteristics of salt licks
Salt licks easily absorb moisture from the air, especially when there is
high humidity. And the block can give way and breakdown with pressure
arising from mishandling. Salt lick blocks once broken become a waste
and of less use to the animal. The dust should not be reconstituted into
feed to avoid problem of salt intoxication.

The best form of Storage for salt licks.
It is desirable to place salt lick on wooden platform to protect it against
dampness. It also provides base ventilation for the salt. Always place
blocks some distance away from the wall.

Usage

The trace elements in salt licks are very stable when handled
as recommended and are released upon being licked by the
animal.



                                    9
How to use salt licks
Salt licks should always be available in animal pens free choice in
addition to clean water in the water trough.

CARE OF VETERINARY EQUIPMENTS.
Veterinary equipments includes Infusion sets, de-worming or
drenching kits, disposable syringes, Hypodermic needles, Clinical
thermometer, Knives for hoof trimming, Blades etc.
1.     It is important to know that surgical instruments such as blades,
       Knives, Indeed all-veterinary equipments can discolor and rust
       if not maintained in a dry condition. Clean and decontaminate all
       veterinary equipment as soon as possible after use and return
       them for safe keeping.

2.     Soiled instruments must not be allowed to dry. Soaking in cold
       water is recommended if cleaning is not to be carried put
       immediately. Never use abrasives as these will spoil the surface
       finish and cause discoloration, rusting and pitting.

3.     When using powerful antiseptics and disinfectants ensure
       solution is mixed at correct strength. Equipments should not be
       left in chemical solutions for long periods and care should be
       taken to rinse off all traces of chemical after cleaning.

4.     Dry all equipment before storage, as any moisture left will
       promote pitting or rust spots due to the reaction of carbon on the
       steel. It is also important to lubricate all veterinary equipments
       periodically to prevent joint stiffness and failures. Use only
       lubricants recommended by your local veterinary doctor.
5.     It is recommended that needle and syringes are used as



                                   10
new on animals. Where this is not possible, they should be cleaned
washed and steamed. Used purified or clean water for the steaming all
the time to avoid deposits on the instruments. Never use methylated
spirit near a heat source.


CARE OF FARM CONSUMABLES
The farm veterinary consumables include absorbent cotton wool,
methylated spirit, Gentian violet, cotton bandage; these consumables
are indispensable aids in the hygienic, safe and proper delivery and
administration of medicaments. Farmers are expected by necessity to
acquire and maintain them on the farm for routine use.

How to handle Farm veterinary consumables
1.    Clinical thermometer, gentian violet and infusion sets and
      methylated spirits should be well arranged inside cartons or
      wrapper or leather bags and keep in the first aid room. Don’t
      leave chemicals or drugs on the floor. Place them back
      immediately after each use.

2.    Check for abnormalities like torn labels, unwrap role, color
      change, odors etc. Also check available brands in the market,
      their expiry dates and when in doubt contact your local
      veterinarian for advice. This advice is important before you
      introduce any new product into your first aid treatment
      collections.

3.    Always ensure the seal of the products you are buying have not
      been tampered with and is intact before use. Tightly recap
      containers after use and never be in hurry when handling



                                 11
drugs or chemicals. Maintain aseptic technique during and after use.
Disposable needles and syringes must be used only once. Before
reuse it must be sterilized. Use sterile materials for all minor operations
such as wound dressing. Always sterilize the bulb of thermometer
before and after use. And immerse in shallow bottled oil for safe keep.

4.      Some veterinary consumables usually come in big containers.
       You should designate a spot in the first aid room for all
       consumables. Store them on pallets or rack. Never put loads on
       them so that you don’t break or damage them. There should be
       cross ventilation where they are kept.

5.     Discarded or used materials and containers should be collected
       in bin bags. Bury them deep in the ground. Drugs and Farm
       chemical are not environmentally friendly. Handle them with
       care.


RESTRICTION ON THE USE OF VETERINARY DRUGS

1. Restrictions on the use of Veterinary Vaccines

The definition of Vaccines includes blood extracts such as serum,
toxins, anti toxins, antibody and antigens used in Veterinary practice for
the purpose of disease prevention and control. All Veterinary vaccines
shall be handled, sold or administered only by a registered veterinary
surgeon or prescribed officers of the Director or chief veterinary officer
of any state.




                                    12
Expired, damage, obsolete and or fake drugs must not be used at all no
matter the temptation. Indeed, they must be discarded. However the
disposal process must be environmentally friendly. Veterinary drugs
are to be buried six feet under the ground. On no account should you
attempt to burn drug.

PLANNING FOR FIRST AID ON THE FARM

First aid is essential part of a good farm. You have to spend time and
considerable amount of money to build it up. First aid unit should be
well planned in consultation with your local vet officer so that it can be
cheap, attractive, convenient and safe to use.

The arrangement of the unit should be given serious attention and
enough time in order to achieve the efficiency of a well-planned farm.
Extra money set aside for this is not only good investments for some
time to come but it also assure a good health of the animals and the
people who will consume your product and your own happiness is
QUARANTEED.




                                   13
Bibliography
1.   NAERLS (1992) Livestock and poultry vaccination procedures. Extension
     Bulletin No. 53, Livestock series No. 13. 21pages.

2.   Animal disease control Decree (1988) Decree No. 10 of the federal
     republic of Nigeria Published in gazette no. 13, vol. 75 of February 1988.
     Printed and distributed by the Federal government press, Lagos, Nigeria.




                                     14
