PRODUCTION AND UTILIZATION OF ‘OGBONO’ (Irvingia
                  gabonensis)




                  Extension Bulletin No.140
                  Horticulture Series No. 4




                  Produced and Distributed By




   National Agricultural Extension and Research Liaison Services,
                      Ahmadu Bello University,
                           P. M. B. 1067,
                               Zaria.




                              1999
                       Acknowledgement

The Authors wish to acknowledge the following Institutions whose
varying contributions helped in the preparation of this bulletin:-
Federal University of Technology (SAAT) Owerri; Forestry
Research Institute of Nigeria; Nigerian Institute for Horticultural
Research and Ministry of Agriculture, Enugu State.


                          Chris Chinaka
                          J. C. Obiefuna
                                               Table of Contents


Acknowledgement ........................................................2
Table of Contents...........................................................3
Introduction..................................................................4
Rainfall requirement....................................................5
Cultivation practices..........................................................................................5
Plant Protection.................................................................................................10
Harvesting and utilization.................................................................................13
Conclusion.........................................................................................................14
Bibliography......................................................................................................15




                                                                  2
Introduction
        Irvingia gabonensis, popularly known as ‘ogbono’ and commonly
called ‘African mango’ or “wild mango”, is an indigenous forest tree
belonging to the group of plants classified as “non timber forest products
(NTEP). In Nupe it is called “pekpeara”; “Ogwi” in bini; “Ogbono/ugiri
depending on the variety in Igbo; “uyo” in Efik and “oro” (tree) ”apon”
(kernel) in Yoruba. It belongs to the Irvingiaceae family of plants. The tree
attains a height of up to 30 meters and about 1.0 meter in girth when fully
developed. The leaves are simple and alternate, up to 10 cm long with
deciduous stipples up to 1.2cm long, which leaves encircling scares on the
branchlets. Flowers are tiny, white to greenish and appear in clustered axially
racemes. The flowers are very sweetly scented. The fruit is slightly flattened,
ellipsoidal drops with fibrous mesocarp and stony endocarp.
        In the species “gabonenesis” of Irvingia, well defined intraspecific
taxa have been recognized; thus there are: Irvingia gabonensis var. gabonensis
and Irvingia gabonensis var excelsa. The pulp of the Irvingia gabonensis var
excelsa is said to be eaten although it is bitter and acrid with the flavour of
turpentine and slightly slimy. On the other hand, the pulp of the I. gabonensis
var gabonensis is sweet, smooth in the mouth and has brittle pulp.

1.1     Ecophysiology:
The natural habitat of I. gabonensis extends from Senegal to Sudan and South
of Angola. In Nigeria, the tree is found growing between latitude 4.15 ando




8.00 N of the equator especially along streams and the banks of rivers and in
    o




village homesteads. The tree has adapted and now grows well even in the
comparatively drier ecological zones of the northern edges of the derived
savanna.

Site Selection
The tree grows well in a variety of soil types ranging from sandy clay loams to
loamy clay soils.

                                      3
Rainfall Requirement
It requires adequate rainfall of about 1000 mm per annum and abundant
sunshine.

Maturity
Under natural conditions, the plant bears fruits between 15-20 years but under
improved management, especially when budded seedlings are planted, the
vegetative phase is considerably reduced and fruiting can start from 4 – 5 years
while economic yield can be attained after 7 – 8 years from planting. The ever
expanding deforestation constitutes a major threat to the trees in the wild while
the activities of fruit collectors, further compound this negative impact on the
natural regeneration of Irvingia trees because the fruits are removed and thus
not given a change to germinate and grow into new trees. These therefore call
for the conscious and planned establishment of Irvingia plantations.

2.0    CULTIVATION PRACTICES:
2.1    Propagation:
       ‘Ogbono’ (Irvingia gabonensis) is commonly propagated by
       seeds.     Increasing awareness have necessitated the
       development of propagation procedures for the plant in
       order to enhance its popularity, economic potentials and
       continued and regular production in traditional and future
       farming systems. In this regard, efforts are made at
       obtaining early flowering (and fruiting) through cultural
       management practices which include budding and
       ‘topping’.
2.2     Nursery:
 Although ground nurseries could be used, polybag, basket or perforated tray
nurseries are recommended. Movable nurseries e.g. polybag nurseries have
the following advantages over ground nurseries:

                                       4
       i)      They save labour cost incurred during digging up for
               transplanting.
       ii)     There is reduced risk of transplanting shocks
       iii)    There is space economy.

If polybag nurseries are to be used, polybags not smaller than 15mm gauge,
12cm diameter and 25 cm deep are recommended. This should be filled with
top soil up to at least 14 cm from the base. The top 10cm should be filled with
saw dust leaving 1cm on top as catchment area during watering (Figure 1)



                      1cm
                                                         Saw dust
                      10cm


                                                         Top soil

                       14cm
                                   12cm


                          Fig. 1: Polybag Nursery

Seed extraction and Nursery establishment
Tree-ripened fruits (that have fallen by themselves) are selected. It is advised
not to germinate fruits that have been plucked from the tree. Seed extraction is
by carefully cutting out completely the fleshy pericarp (pulp), and washing the
nut using sand and water.


                                       5
Allowing the pulp to rot naturally and washing in water reduces the
germination percentage by about 20%. Dry the nuts in a shade for one or two
days. Prolonged drying for more than a week results in decreased seed
viability. Avoid sun drying. Plant seeds within two or three days after
extraction. To avoid the incidence of damping-off treat seeds with Benlate or
other potent fungicides before sowing. After sowing, move the polybags to a
shade and arrange in 10 x 100 or 20 x 50. Water daily. Avoid over-watering to
prevent water logging and damping off disease. Apply fertilizer when nutrient
deficiency symptoms e.g. chlorosis are noted. Apply water soluble fertilizer,
NPK dissolved in water from time to time. 1 kg NPK may be applied in about 6
doses for 2000 seedlings. Germination starts 3 weeks after planting and may
continue for another 4 weeks.

2.3 Budding:
10 – 12 months after germination, the seedlings are ready for budding.
Budding is done at about 15 – 20 cm height using the inverted “T” cut.
Rootstocks to be budded should not be less than 0.5cm in diameter at a height
of 15cm from the soil surface. Obtain budwood from healthy mature
flowering trees. It is recommended to bud during the rainy season.

2.4 Land Preparation:
Land preparation for field planting is done between November and March.
The operation involved include: clearing, felling of unwanted trees, cross-
cutting, packing and burning. After burning, marking out of the planting sites
follows. The spacing of 7m x 7m is recommended. This gives a population of
about 200 stands in a hectare. After marking out, dig planting holes 60 cm x 60
cm x 45 cm. Fill the holes with well decomposed organic matter and top soil
two weeks before transplanting. Do not put inorganic fertilizer into planting
holes at transplanting of seedlings. This may be harmful to the young
seedlings.



                                      6
2.5 Field Establishment:
10-12 months after budding, seedlings are ready for transplanting. Seedlings
are ready for field planting 20 – 24 months after sowing in the nursery.
Transplanting is done in the early part of the rainy season as soon as the rains
stabilize – i.e. May – June in the rain forest zones; and June – July in the
savanna. Seedlings should be transplanted with the ball of earth around the
roots of the plant. If budded seedlings are planted, regularly check and prune
off all side shoots from the stock.

2.6 Fertilizer Recommendation:
Fertilizer application starts one year after field establishment. If the planting
holes were well prepared (with well decomposed organic matter and top soil),
no chemical fertilizer is required in the first year of establishment. Within the
next year (1-4 years after planting) and if the soil is fairly rich to rich, an
application of 0.25kg/stand of NPK (15:15:15; 10:10:20 or NPK Mg
12:12:17:2) or any other compound fertilizer having NPK may be applied.
Fertilizer application should be done during the rainy season. If however the
soil is poor, the dosage could be increased to 0.5kg/stand. The plants are ring
weeded before broadcasting the fertilizer around each stand once a year.

2.7 Topping:
 This is a management practice whereby all the growing shoots of the plant are
shaped by clipping (prunning or training). In Irvingia, this is a “taming”
process. In the traditional system constant bush burning and farming activities
take care of “topping”. Topping has the following advantages:
a)          It gives the tree the desired shape – “dome” instead of the conical
       shape that the tree is naturally prone to.
b)          It exposes more leaves to sunlight thereby enhancing
       photosynthesis and facilitating more fruit formation.




                                       7
c)         It encourages early flowering
d)         It controls the height of the plant.
Between the second and third year, and towards the end of the rains, do the first
topping (prunning). This is achieved by cutting back all the growing shoots.
Repeat this yearly for the next 3 – 4 years.

2.8 Interplanting:
Within the first five years of field life and until the Irvingia closes up all the
“elbow spaces”, food crops such as yam, cassava, cocoyam, and vegetables
can be planted within the Irvingia stands. Ginger will grow well panted under
Irvingia. Spreading crops especially sweet potato is highly recommended as
interplant because apart from the edible sweet potato roots, the sweet potato
will also serve as a soil cover to check erosion and to control weed growth. At
full cover of Irvingia, only crops like ginger, cocoyam and sweet potato which
are shade tolerant can be interplanted with Irvingia.

2.9 Irrigation:
 Seedlings transplanted in May/June or June/July depending on location, may
be adversely affected by the following dry season (Nov-March) especially if
the dry season comes early and extends to March – April of the following year.
During this time, it is recommended to mulch round the stands with grass and
supply 20-25 litres of water per tree per week. This will enhance survival rate
and early productivity.

2.10 Replacement of Dead Plants
 Plants that fail to survive, should be replaced the next rainy season. This
practice should continue until all the missing stands are filled up. Before
replanting, the dead plants and the planting holes should be properly checked
to find out the cause of the death. If the death is caused by a disease or pest,
adequate measures should be taken to ‘clean up’ the planting site and planting
material before and after replanting.


                                        8
3.0            PLANT PROTECTION:

3.1 Diseases:
Most of the diseases of Irvingia are nursery diseases. These include:
a) Damping off: Irvingia is susceptible to damping off disease caused by two
fungi – Pythium spp. and Phytophtora spp. Serious damping off especially
when germinated in unsterized soils is a very common feature. The seedlings
remain susceptible till the cotylendons drop 3 – 4 weeks after planting (WAP).

Control Avoid waterlogging conditions in the field or nursery. Spray affected
plants with Bordeaux mixture (Copper Sulphate mixed with lime) at the rate of
2kg/ha at 0.4g of powder per litre of water. Efficient treatment requires
complete wetting of affected parts. Dithane M-45 or Furadan could equally be
used only on seedlings infected after the cotylendons had opened and the first 2
leaves appear light green in colour.

b) Leaf spots: there are two types of leaf spots –
(i)       Chlorotic to necrotic spots caused by two fungi - Rhizoctonia spp
      and Collectrotirichum spp; and
(ii)              Reddish purple spots caused by Rhizoctonia spp. These are
      controlled as stated for damping off.
3.2 Pests
(a) Insects pests: Young seedlings are attacked by grasshoppers, caterpillars,
scale insects etc. Leaf miners and fruit borers occasionally attack mature
plants.

Control
These pests are controlled by spraying monthly with any broad spectrum
insecticide like Ultracide, Gamalin 20, Rhonalin 20EC, Mocap 10 G etc.
Purple blotches on leaves of Irvingia gabonensis var excelsa delays on set of
fruits.


                                       9
This is caused by armoured scale insects. The control equally is by spraying
monthly with any potent insecticide.

(b) Rodents: - Rodents can attack newly transplanted stands of Irvingia and
destroy them.

Control
Baiting with rodenticides (e.g. Chlorophacinone) is a recommended control
measure, otherwise, setting of traps could keep off rodents from newly
established fields.

(c) Epiphytes: The mistletoe (Visum spp) is a green parasitic shrub which
grows attached to trees in a ball like bush. In Irvingia, like other fruit trees
(Citrus, kola etc.), this parasitic plant systematically kills the host plant from
branch to branch until the entire plant dies.

Control
The control is by physically removing and burning the weed or by cutting off
the affected branch.

(d)     Weed control: In the first 2 years of field establishment, it is
recommended to ring weed 1 meter from the base of the plants. In situations
where the trees have been interplanted with food crops, the entire field should
be clean weeded as the need arises but at least twice a year. If the field is not
intercropped with food crops, slash the inter row (as the need arises) to keep
down weeds.

(e) Fire Tracing: Bush fire which is a regular future during the dry season
can destroy a newly established Irvingia field. It is recommended to cut a fire
trace 6 meters wide round the plantation during the dry season to create a fire
corridor round the plantation each dry season.


                                       10
4.      HARVESTING AND UTILIZATION:
Fresh ‘Ogbono’ comes into market between June and August and is most
scarce between March and April. The two varieties of Irvingia have different
flowering/fruiting cycles, thus: (Table 1)

Table 1: Flowering and fruiting of Irviugia spp

                Variety                  Flowering        Fruiting


   I.    Gabonensis var. gabonensis    Nov. – March      April – July
                                            and             and
                                           June          Sept – Oct.


   II.   Gabonensis var. excelsa      Sept. – Oct.    December – March


When Irvingia fruits mature, they fall to the ground and are collected for
processing. Mature fruits can equally be plucked manually or mechanically.
Picking of ripe Irvingia fruits is an organized annual event in areas where
Irvingia grows in the wild on comunal lands.

4.1     Processing:
 After picking, the fruits are heaped and the pulp (mesocarp) is allowed to
ferment for about 7 – 10 days. Thereafter, the seeds are washed off with water
and at times with some sand. In freshly harvested Irvingia, the pulp can be
manually removed with sharp knives to extract the seeds. The pulp so
removed could be processed into other products while the seeds are dried in the
sun or by fire. After drying the seeds are split into two flat white cotyledons
(kernels) and further dried before marketing.


                                        11
The seeds may be stored in a calabashes, pots or sacs at room temperature for
upward of 6 – 8 months. The kernels (cotyledons) are the Irvingia of
commerce.

Yield
An average kernel yield of 25 kg/stand of Irvingia is considered good. Kernel
yields could be up to 30-35 kg/plant in good years and could go as low as below
20kg in bad fruiting years.

4.2. Utilization
 The kernels of Irvingia contain 54-67% of fatty matter. Thus Irvingia can
classify as an oil crop. The kernel serves as condiments used in thickening and
flavouring soups. The more the ground kernel “draws” in soup, the more
acceptable it is. Thus, Irvingia gabonensis var. excelsa which “draws” more
than the var. gabonensis is more acceptable in soup making.
The fresh fruit of the I. Gabonensis var. gabonensis is sweet and edible, and is
suitable in the manufacture of jams, jellies and fruit juices. The pulp of the var.
excelsa is bitter and inedible.
         The kernel of Irvingia is used in making a fatty paste called “dika”.
This is the principal ingredient in the making of “Gabon chocolate” or “Dika
bread”. Thus the Irvingia fruit is often called “dika nut”. When fully dried, the
kernel shells are good firing materials. The bark of the tree is bitter and is
added to palmwine as a preservative.
In traditional religion, some tribes use the split shells of the fruit in divination;
giving a favourable omen if one falls flat and the other cover side up. The
wood is pale brown, very hard, fine grained and immune to termites. It is used
in building canoes from the trunk; pestles for yam mortars; house posts etc.
The tree is useful for afforestation and erosion control.




                                         12
Conclusion
Dependence on supply of irviugia from the wild is not susitable. Concious and
planned irviugia plantations establishment is highly advotated in line with the
following stages:
*Establish nurseries using ploybags
*Use tree-ripened fruits that have fallen by the themselves to establish
nurseries
*Set the nurseries under shades
*Apply water-solute fertilizers from time to time using Ikg NPK in
about 6 doses for 200 seedlings
*Bud at 10-12 months
*10-12 months after budding, plant out in the field
*Plant at 7m x 7m to give about 200 stand
*Apply recommended fertilizer annually starting from one year after
field establishmen
*Start topping from between the second and third year of establishment
         for the next 3-4 years
*Interplant with food crops untill full canopy is established
*Under dry conditions, mulch and water
*Replace dead stands.
*Check for pests and dieases and control as recommed
*Keep plantation relatively weed free
Create fire corridor during the dry season
*Pick fallen mature fruits or pluck mannualy


                                      13
        Bibliography

1.    Eze, I.O.I. and J. C. Okafor (1984). “How to grow selected fruit trees”.
      Ministry of Agriculture, Anambra State, Enugu, Information Series
      Booklet No. 4.

2.    FUTO (Federal University of Technology, Owerri) 1986. Annual Res.
      Report.

3.        – do - 1987. Annual Report.

4.    FUTO (Fed. University of Tech. Owerri) 1988. School of Agric. And
      Agric. Technology: Production Guide No. 1. Cultivation of Agbono –
      (Irvingia gabonensis).

5.      Nielsen, M. S. (1965). Introduction to the flowering Plants of West
      Africa. University of London Press Ltd. London. E.C.4.

6.     Okafor, J. C. (1980) “Edible Indigenous Woody Plants in the Rural
      Economy of the Nigerian Forest Zone”. An Invited paper presented for
      NAB Workshop on State of Knowledge of the Nigerian Rainforest
      Ecosystem. Forest Ecol. Mgt. 5.

7.   Okafor, J. C., and I. C. Okolo (1974). Potentials of some Indigenous Fruit
      Trees in Nigeria. In: Proc. Of the 5 Ann. Conf. Of Forestry Assn. Of
                                           th




      Nigeria. Jos 1-6 Dec. 1974.




                                      14
