RUBBER PRODUCTION IN NIGERIA




              Extension Bulletin No.213
               Forestry Series No. 14




                       Published by


National Agricultural Extension and Research Liaison Services,
                   Ahmadu Bello University,
                        P. M. B. 1067,
                            Zaria.




                            2000
                              Acknowledgement

The author of this bulletin acknowledge the management of NAERLS, ABU;
and the Rubber Research Institute of Nigeria (RRIN) who provided the logistic
support for the production of this Bulletin. Our appreciation goes to Dr.
Johnson Onyibe and Crop & Forestry staff for their encouragement which led
to the final production.
Finally, I appreciate the NAERLS Publication Review Committee for editing
the manuscript.

                              Uyovisere Edna
                                   2000
                                            Table of contents



Acknowledgement........................................................................          2

Table of contents...........................................................................     3

Introduction................................................................... 4
Agronomic Practices...................................................................           4

Root stock nursery Establishment.............................................                    6

Field Planting................................................................................   11

Conclusion...................................................................................    19

BIBLIOGRAPHY.........................................................................            20




                                                       2
Introduction
Natural rubber, Para rubber, Hevea Brasiliensis, is a commercial tree
economically grown in plantations. Para rubber plant is useful for the latex that
bleeds from the stem in the event of wounding. The product of the coagulated
latex is rubber. Rubber is used in the manufacture a number of industrial
products which range from tires, balls, containers, shoes to bands and a lot of
other items.
Rubber is important in the socio-economic life of many tropical developing
nations, such as Nigeria and Brazil. Before the 60s, before the era of the oil
boom, rubber was one of the agricultural commodities that were the main stay
of Nigerian economy. The cultivation of rubber provided bulk employment for
the people of the then Mid-West now known as the Edo and Delta states.
However, rubber is not native to Nigeria. As the name suggests, it is an
introduction from Brazil.

Agronomic Practices
Soil/weather requirement:
       Rubber requires a well-drained, sandy loam, well-aerated permeable
subsoil in which its root system can proliferate. Rubber cannot stand a
waterlogged soil. A land drained to at least 1.2m is adequate for rubber.
       Annual rainfall of at least 1700mm well distributed throughout the
year with a short dry spell is ideal for the growth of the plant. Soil rich in
nitrogen are preferred although phosphorous and potassium must also be
available as well as trace elements.
       Temperatures between 240C and 350C or more are needed for proper
growth of rubber.

Land Preparation:
        Land preparation for the cultivation of rubber can be carried out either
manually or with the use of mechanical power. The choice of method depends
on the available resources and the cost of equipment and labour.


                                       3
         Mechanical land preparation involves the use of heavy machinery to
remove and pack heavy tress. The advantage in the use of mechanical power is
in the short period required for clearing large expanse of land and neat packing
of felled materials.
         However, with the mechanical land clearing there is the possibility of
compacting the fragile soils and removal of topsoil, which can lead to soil
erosion.
         In order to avoid these undesirable side effects in the use of mechanical
power, experienced hands should be engaged to operate the equipment while it
is also important to seek advise from knowledgeable extension agents.

Planting materials.
         Rubber tree can be grown from ‘ordinary seeds’ (referred to as
“illegitimate seeds),
from the so-called clonal seeds or budded seedlings of either the ordinary
seeds or clonal rubber.
         Planting through unbudded seedlings obtained from ‘ordinary seeds’
are not recommended. Most rubber plantations in Nigeria are planted with
varieties of rubber referred to as clonal rubber.
         A clone is a group of plants in which all the individuals are obtained by
vegetative propagation from a single mother tree. Thus there are certain well-
defined characters that are constant with a clone.
         The budded rubber stump is obtained by grafting a scion of a high-
yielding variety onto a seedling rootstock. The production of budded stumps
requires reasonable capital outlay coupled with special techniques. This is
why only commercially oriented producers go into rubber stump production.
Most growers rather purchase their budded stumps from recognised sources.
         Recognised sources include the Rubber Research Institute Iyanomo
Benin, the Agric. Development Programme and other recognised producers.




                                        4
Recommended Clones
       A GTI Java Clone has the best all-round characteristics and can be
   planted with safety anywhere except where moisture levels are low.

PRION Java is a slow starter in terms of yield but has other good
characteristics.
         It has an excellent shading facility thus recurrent maintenancecost is
reduced. This clone is susceptible to Phytophthora in high rainfall areas.
RRIM 600 Malaysia is a top yielding clone but is susceptible to both
Phytophthora and Pink disease and should not be planted in areas of high wind
velocity.PB5/51 Malaysia. RRIM 600 Malaysia yields less than the clone
listed above is somewhat susceptible to Oidium. It is the most wind resistant
of all clones developed for large scale planting. However it has a tendency
toward brown blast disease and the bark renewal is below average.

Root stock nursery Establishment
        A rootstock nursery is one in which healthy seeds are raised to produce
the seedling material onto which, the scions are budgrafted.
        The objective of a nursery is to be able to grow healthy young plants,
which after budding are transplanted to the field. Nursery establishment
requires careful planing and timing.
Pre-nursery: Rubber seed fall occurs in Nigeria between August and
September. Fresh seeds from early seed falls are best for optimum
germination. Fresh seeds lose 50% of the moisture content within a few days.
Therefore seeds should be planted in the germination bed within 48 hours of
collection. Do not select light and shrunken seed.
        Seeds for germination can be prepared either from sand beds or box
beds. The rate of germination in sand beds is much higher than in box beds. It
is recommended that sand beds be used.



                                      5
         The soil of the bed should be turned over and raised to a height of 15-
25cm before being leveled. The width of the bed should not exceed 1.5m (5ft)
with paths between the beds to permit easy movement around the beds. A
layer of sand 6cm (2 inches) deep should be spread on the surface of the bed.
         The freshly collected seeds to be germinated are pressed by the flat
side downward at such a depth that the upper surface is just visible. The seeds
should be very close to each other so that the bed can contain as many seeds as
possible. The beds, usually constructed in shaded areas, should be mulched
with grasses and watered daily.
         As soon as the seed sprouts or the radicle emerges, the germinated
seeds should be transferred into main nursery. Seeds that fail to germinate after
7 days should be discarded.
         For a hectare, 180,000 seeds are required in a rootstock pre-nursery,
this allows for 50% germination.

Main (field) Nursery
        Two methods can be used in the main nursery: 1. the conventional bed
and 2. the polybag method

Field Nursery:

Site Selection:
        Select a location that is fully exposed to sunlight close to a readily
available supply of water. A flat or near flatland with a loamy textured soil is
ideal. It is important to avoid areas where flooding can occur and if possible
the area should be close to the budded stumps (either on the beds or polybags
are to be planted).

Field Preparation:
        Cultivate the land by ploughing and harrowing to provide a good
texture. Ploughing and harrowing should be done early enough before the
heavy rains in July. If cultivation is done too late when the soil moisture is
high, the puddled soil may result in excessive run-off leading to soil Erosion.


                                       6
Field Nursery Layout:
A basic double-row system – 30cm between plants: 60cm between every 2         nd




row.

         On a conventional bed and at a spacing of 30cm x 30cm about 90,000
seedling can be raised per hectare. The beds should be free of weeds either
through hoe weeding or the use of herbicides such as gramozone or ‘roundup’
used at least two weeks before transplanting.
         In the nursery lining can be done using a thin rope which is marked at
the appropriate spacing of 30cm and laid along the proposed row.
         Seed planting should be carefully done because of the delicate nature
of the germinated seed. The germinated seed is placed in the shallow hole with
the flattened end. Thus is then covered with a small quantity of soil.




                     30cm



           30cm




                                     60cm


                                      7
Thining:
        The first thinning is carried out after 3-4 months of growth. Stunted
and any seriously disease infected seedlings are discarded.
        The second thinning is done between the 7 and 8 month and this
                                                      th     th




should reduce the population to about 45000, which is about ¼ of the original
seed
Polybag Nursery Method:
        Planting materials in polybags provides optimum degree of selectivity
and polybagged stumps achieve much greater uniformity in growth at field
planting. Provided they are well taken care of, polybagged budded stumps,
attain maturity at least a year
        In Nigeria, budding is done in the wet season, commencing from the
late April and extends to mid-October. However the best periods to bud are:
(i)     Early May until mid-July
(ii)    Mid September until mid October (dormant budding)
        Budding during the heavy rains i.e. (mid-July to mid-September) is not
advisable because of the disease anthracose is very severe in wet conditions
and throughout the nursery thus reducing the budding success severely.
        In order to achieve the best results, the following should strictly be
observed:
1.      Do not bud in the rain when the materials are wet. Diseases are
        easily be transferred with wet materials.
2.      Avoid budding during the dry season unless some form of irrigation or
        adequate watering is ensured.
3.      Delay commencement of budding operations until the morning mists
        have subsided. This is to provide a dry surface on the budding
        materials.
4.      Ensure that rootstocks attain a minimum diameter of 5cm and are
        vigorous.
5.      Avoid budding to old or very large rootstock. The barks of old or large
        rootstock are inclined to split.


                                      8
6.      If a bud fails to pick do not rebud the same rootstock until the following
        season i.e. about 7 months after by which time the excised bark will
        have renewed.
Bud grafting Process
Bud grafting requires skill which, can be acquired through constant practice.
Poor budding can be costly as time, energy and resources are wasted when
there are budding failures.
Steps in Budding:
1.      Wipe and dry dirt from the ground level 15cm of rootstock.
2.      Make two vertical cuts, of about 2cm each of 0.75cm apart and allow
        the excluding latex from the cut to coagulate.
3.      Prepare the bud patch by cutting from the budwood a strip of bark wood
        about 2cm long and 0.75cm wide, ensuring there is a bud and a leaf
        scar.
4.       Gently raise the flap open and insert the bud patch with the leaf scar
        below the bud. Ensure that the bud patch is in the centre and there is
        minimal space remaining on the either side.
5.      Press the flap back over the bud and bound in place with waterproof
        materials such as budding tapes or polyethylene plastic film.
                The tapes should be removed after about 3 weeks. In doing this
        gradually remove both tapes and twine. Cut off the flap at the bottom or
        top to reveal the graft. This is re-examined after about 7-10 days for
        green tissue on the patch. If green tissue is revealed with a gentle
        scratch, the patch has been successful.
Budwood Multiplication
        In a nursery programme, it is important to ensure that there is an
available supply of bud wood. This can be in the form of conventional brown
bud wood or green bud sticks.
        Bud wood nursery should be done one year in advance of preparing a
field nursery so that an optimum supply of buds will be available for grafting.



                                        9
Bud wood garden can be established in several ways:
         (a)      Purchase and planting of budded stumps of preferred clones
                  from a reliable source. Ensuring that each clone is well
                  demarcated, if more than one clone is purchased.
         (b)      Planting out germinated seeds and conventionally bud them 9-
                  10 months later Using bud wood obtained from elsewhere.
that all other stock shoots are pruned regularly retaining the scion emerging
from the bud patch.
         Regular weeding and fertilizer application should be practised.
Fertilizer application should be carried out after weeding to make the plants
more receptive to nutrient uptake.
         It is good to mulch each plant or mulch along planted rows at the onset
of dry season. Good mulch application can do much to prevent shoot from
busting out prematurely.
Field Planting
Field Preparation:
         When a suitable land for rubber has been selected, field preparation for
the budded materials, is very important. Field preparation for large rubber
plantations include survey and tracing where the land is divided into blocks,
and construction of access paths or roads.
         In both large and small farms, underbrushing and felling of trees is
done to expose the land. Burning follows slashing of all growth. Burning is
particularly recommended on a new land for rubber, burning is an important
part of root disease control. Disease pathogens in logs and stumps are greatly
reduced by burning these materials off.
         Field and land preparation should be carried out in the dry season and
concluded before the rains.
Planting
         Planting should be done with at least one year old budded stumps
either in polybags or bare-root stumps.
         The planting density varies, but a 6.6 x 3.3m spacing is recommended.


                                       10
This would give 450 trees per ha. The adequate dimension of a planting hole is
60cm x 60 x 60cm.
Planting must be done very early in the season so that a good root system can
develop before the dry season. Early planting will also ensure that supply of
any failures can be done by the middle of the wet season. It should be noted
that supplying after more than 11 to 12 months after the original planting
should not be attempted.

Maintenance & Cultural Practices
Fire Trace:     fire trace is best before the dry season. Fire trace should be
                made the whole way round the farm with the width not less
                than 30m.
Weed Control
        The surroundings of the rubber plant should be regularly weeded.
Weed control can be manually, chemically or mechanically.
        In manual or hoe weeding, scrapping the soil away from the plant can
create a depression round the plant that might prevent runoff of water. This
should be avoided.
The loss of top soil should be prevented in manual weeding by ensuring that
only the weed are scrapped off and that no damage is done to the plant by the
blade of the hoe
        Mechanically weeding a rubber farm is possible if only the equipment
is available and the spacing of the rubber plants allows it. A slasher mounted
on a light tractor with a good operator can work faster than manual weeding.
This has to be supplemented however with manual weeding to ensure that the
immediate environment of rubber tree is weed.

Herbicides                                                Rate
2,4 - D, Dalopon or glyphosate        0.5 liters in 200 liters of water
(Round up)
                                      125ml in 100 liters of water
Amitole                               0.5 liters in 200 liters of water



                                     11
Gramozone 0.5litres in 200 liters of water Eupatoruim odoratum (Siam weed)
        This is a noxious weed of the family compositae, which needs
This is a noxious weed of the family compositae, which needs a special
attention. It seeds freely and if not checked and controlled can dominate
wherever it becomes established. If burning has not succeeded in controlling
this weed herbicide use can control it if carefully applied.
        - Use 2 liters of Tordon or Hedonal in 200 liters of water on
            Eupatoruim infested area and spot spray if necessary about 3-5
            weeks.
        In general, Herbicide application is required during the set season
when the weeds are growing vigorously. Herbicide applications may be
bimonthly depending on the growth of weeds.

Fertilizer Application
The type and quantity of fertilizer to be used depend on the nutrient status of
the soil.
         Whatever fertilizer programme is used, it is important to ensure that
the applications are correctly placed around each plant. Split application of
the dosage is recommended instead of putting full dose at a single application.




                                      12
  Year of Application      Fertilizer type      Rate/ha             Remark
  1 year before planting   I) Superphosphate    500kg       This is an advance
                           ii) Murate of Potash   50kg      application and
                                                            can be broadcast and
                           I) Urea                 50kg     properly mixed with
                                                            the soil.

  Year of Planting         ii) Supper phosphate    250kg


                           iii) Murate of potash    40kg

  2nd year                  Urea                    35kg

                           Superphosphate           200kg

  3rd & 4th year           No application                   Much depends on the
                                                            age and appearance of
                                                            the tree.
Mulching
        The young rubber tree should be mulched particularly at the beginning
of the dry season and usually around the second or third week in November.
Mulching is to retain moisture during the long dry season. Slashed cover crops
can be used, placed close to the base of the tree but should not be in contact with
the growing plant. Mulching reduces moisture loss, erosion and prevents
destruction of soil structure.
Prunning
        As soon as the plants are established regular rounds of removal of side
shoots should commence. All shoots other than the scion emerging from the
bud-patch must be pruned off. When two shoots sprout from the bud, only one
should be retained. In the first three months of planting, pruning should be
done at 7-10 days interval and thereafter on monthly basis. Pruning prevents
diversion of nutrients to vegetative growth of unwanted shoots.
Supplying
        By the second year, a uniform stand of rubber should be aimed


                                            13
at. Materials to be used in supplying must be healthy and should be of about
the same age with the other plants if not older. Supply of vacant points should
be done as early as possible during the wet season to permit sufficient time for
consolidation before the dry season.
        Points that still contain vacancies after two years of growth can still be
supplied with careful selection of stumps.
Thinning Out
Thinning is the removal of potentially unproductive trees. The retention of
these types of trees is uneconomic, as such trees will deprive vigorously
growing trees of available nutrients. Trees can be identified as unproductive if
the girth is below the minimum expected of the age, or trees affected by root
diseases or damaged by wind, lighting or fire.
Diseases and Pests of Rubber Diseases
       The diseases affecting the root system of rubber are the most
destructive diseases of rubber in Nigeria. The forest trees are the major
sources of infection because they are hosts to the disease causing pathogens.
When the trees are felled for planting, most of the diseases persist in the roots
and stumps and spread to new rubber plants. Hence stumping and burning of
new plantations or farms reduce the incidence of root disease.
       The panel diseases make tapping difficult and consequently reduce the
productive life span of such affected trees.
       The leaf diseases are more important in the nurseries because they
cause die -back and reduce the budable seedling.
Insect Pests
       The only major insect pests of rubber are the termites. Damage is done
on newly planted seedbeds where buds are eaten up and the young roots are
destroyed.
Control -       Termite attack is serious only during the dry periods.
                Good watering regime is a good way of preventing attack in the
nursery.


                                       14
Table 1: Rubber Diseases, symtoms and control
    Disease                               Symptoms/Damage                          Control
    ROOT DISEASES

    1.   White root disease               It accounts for 90% of all mortality     i) During field preparation, remove and
         Caused by                        due to root diseases                     burn logs and stumps because they are the
         Rigidoporus Lignosus             There is general discoloration           major source of infection.
         (Klotzsch).                      of the leaves with later die-
                                          back of branches.                        ii) On a growing rubber tree, remove dead
                                          White and thread- like materials are     or dying trees entirely.
                                          found on all
                                          infected roots.                          iii) Use of fungicides
                                                                                   a) Apply as a soil drench to the affected
                                                                                         area.
                                                                                   b) FOMAC 2 apply all over the root of
                                                                                         the infected tree.
    2.   Brown Root Rot Disease           Wilting, yellowing and death             i)Remove infected plants and
         Phellinus noxius                  Of tree. Brown threads                     burn.
                                           (mycelium) aggregates into a tough      ii) Inspect roots of plants close to diseased
                                          mass and secretes a                      trees and excavate infected roots. Burn all
                                          gum like fluid.                          excavated roots.

    3.   Armillaria root not Armillaria   This is restricted to the southeastern   Control like in white root disease.
         mellea                           part of Nigeria.
                                          Attacked trees exhibit spongy rotten
                                          bark.
    4.   Black stripe                     Vertical lines develop above the         Avoid the use of susceptible clones such as
         Caused by Phytophthora           tapping panel which later coalesce       RRIM 600, PR 107, PB 86, RRIM 605,
         palmivora                        into lessons preventing regeneration     RRIN 607 RRIM 623. Use tolerant clones.
                                          of the tapped panel                      Apply Difolatan 80 W.P. weekly on the
                                                                                   tapping panel with a brush.
         Mouldy Rot Disease                 This is also a disease of the              -Thin properly and avoid
         Ceratocystis Fimbrata              tapping panel. It occurs                   too close planting.
                                            mostly in the wet season.                  -Use disinfected knives.
                                            Disease can spread through                 Use Difolation to disinfect.
                                            taper’s knives.                            -Weed regularly to reduce
                                                                                       density of undergrowth and
                                                                                       reduce dampness.
                                                                                       The disease is unable to
                                                                                       thrive in conditions of low
                                                                                       humidity.

    1. Bird’s eye leaf spot                 The disease is confined to                 - Weekly spray of 1.8 kg
       Dreschlera hevea .                   nurseries and bud wood                     FERMATE in 90 litres of
                                            gardens. Infection does not                water, or Dithane – M-45
                                            result in death but in
                                            defoliation and weakening
                                            of the seedlings. It causes
                                            delay in reaching maturity.
                                            Circular spores with
                                            transparent centre occur on
                                            leaves.
    2. Gloeosporium Leaf                    It is a serious disease of                 Apply preventive spray or
       Disease                              trees in the second and                    dusting of Dithane – M-45.
       Colletorichum                        third year of life. It does
       Gloesporoides.                       not kill but if uncontrolled,
                                            it can cause repeated
                                            defoliation and die back. It
                                            is very active during the
                                            wet seasons.



                                                                              15
Application of Furadan 3G, sprinkled round the seedling can prevent termite
attack.
Parasites
Mistletoes - These are flowering parasitic plants of the family Loranthus sp.
The leaves arise from slender twisted branches running over the surface of the
host stem connected to it at intervals.

Control:- Remove affected branches during the dry           season when the
mistletoe is more distinct and before flowering.

Thonningia gall          This is a fleshy herb with root galls measuring about
18cm. The galls arrest the growth of rubber. It is relatively new and was
recently identified at the Rubber Research institute, Iyanomo




                                     16
                                  Conclusion
The success of natural rubber production depends on the following practices:
   ·   Start plantation with improved clones acquired from reputable sources
   ·   Select sites with well drained deep soil
   ·   Prepare the land for planting
   ·   Plant timely (from June to July)
   ·   Space appropriately (3.5 X 7.0 for 450 trees/ha)
   ·   Plant cover crop (preferably Pueraria phaseoloides)
   ·   Control weeds regularly along the avenues using herbicides, and hoe to ring
       weed 1m around the plant
   ·   Supply only when there are missing stands
   ·   Initially plant more trees than needed and gradually thin down to 450/Ha
   ·   Apply fertilizer to immature rubber at the rate of 1 bag of NPK/Ha at the ratio
       of 2:1:1 before the rains
   ·   When 70% of the trees attain 52cm in girth, open field at 150cm from ground
       for tapping
   ·   Tap properly to produce good quality latex
   ·   Remove all dirt in latex to obtain high grade crumb, sheet or crepe.
Report any observed abnormality to the local extension agent closest to you.
For further enquiries contact the NAERLS zonal office closest to you. The
NAERLS zonal offices as are follows:
The Director RRIN, PMB 1049, Benin City may be contacted for more
information.




                                        17
                            BIBLIOGRAPHY

Uraih, O.B.C. (2001). Nursery management and budding techniques.
Proceedings of a National Training Workshop on Nursery Management
on and budding techniques, held at Iyanomo, 18th-21 , Sept. 2001.
                                                   st




Rubber Research Institute of Nigeria (RRIN). 14 Steps to grow Rubber.
RRIN production
Rubber Research Institute of Nigeria (RRIN). Supplying. Advisory circular
No4 (formerly No. 3)




                                   18
