                SNAIL PRODUCTION
              TECHNIQUES IN NIGERIA




                Extension Bulletin No. 108
                  Forestry Series No.12




                 Produced and Distributed By
National Agricultural Extension and Research Liaison Services
                Ahmadu Bello University, Zaria.
                  ACKNOWLEDGEMENT

The authors wish to gratefully acknowledge the immense help got
from the following during the preparation of this bulletin:-
       *Federal University of Technology, Owerri
       *Federal University of Agriculture, Umudike
       *Rubber Research Institute of Nigeria, Benin; and
       *F A O Publication on Snail Farming (Rome).

                             Chris Chinaka and E. K. Wilson.
                                             (1995).
                           TABLE OF CONTENTS
                                                                         Page
Acknowledgement …           …         …                                     .2
Introduction        …       …         …                       …            .3
Snail Farming System        …   …     …                       …            .3
Requirement Before Starting …         …                                    .4
Selection of Site           …         …                                ...…5
Choice of Breeding          …         …                                ..….6
Types of Snails Farm        …         …                                ...…8
Construction of A Snail Pen (Snailery)…                       …        ... 9
Introduction of Snails into Pen …     …                       …        .. 15
Feeds and Feeding of Snails…          …                       …        .. 16
Taking care of the Snails …           …                       …        .. 17
Causes of Mortality in Snails   …     …                                .…18
Harvesting Snails           …         …                                .…18
Economics of Snail Production …       …                       …           .19
Summary and conclusion....................................................21
Bibliography.................................................................22




                                            2
INTRODUCTION:
       Snail meat commonly known as “Congo meat” is one of the
most popular delicacies in Nigeria. Snails are one of the
commonest sources of animal protein in Southern Nigeria where
the ecosystem favours their continued existence. The meat is
high in protein (12 – 16%) and Iron (45 – 50 mg/kg); low in fat (0.05
– 0.08%) and contains almost all the amino acids needed for
human nutrition.
       Ordinarily, in Nigeria, snails are collected from the wild.
Wild snail population have considerably declined because of
human activities such as: deforestation, pesticide use, slash and
burn agriculture, bush fires and collection of snails before they
have reached maturity. If the present intensity of these factors
continues unchecked, the giants land snails will sooner or latter
get extinct. One way of preventing this from happening is to start
rearing snails in farms just as is done for poultry, sheep, goats,
and rabbits.

SNAIL FARMING
       Snail farming is the rearing of snails in captivity. The snails
are confined in an enclosure and most of their requirements like
feed; water and lime are supplied on a regular basis by the farmer.
On maturity, the snails are harvested, processed and consumed
by the farmer or sold. Since the seasonality of supply of snails
from the wild limits their use for meat on a continuous basis, the
need for organized small or large scale snail farming has become
imperative.



                                  3
 SNAILS FARMING SYSTEMS:
       There are two main systems of snail farming. These are:
Indoor and Outdoor systems.
Indoor System: This system involves raising snails indoors in
pens located in a building. The snails are fed a mixture of fresh
vegetables, concentrates, and other food materials. The system
utilizes little space as the snails could be raised even in trays
placed on shelves on the walls. In advanced management, the
system allows for temperature regulation, controlled lighting,
regular cleaning, and health care.
Out-door System:           In this system, snails are raised out-
doors on pastures. The snails may or may not be fed. The farmer
has little control over the performance of the snails. The snails
move about feeding on natural food materials.
       A modification of the out-door system is one in which the
snails are confined out-doors in enclosures and fed both synthetic
and natural diets. It is easier to control and manipulate snails in
this setting. This system fits in very well into the Nigerian farming
system.

REQUIREMENTS BEFORE STARTING:
      The farmer will need the following to start a snail farm –
(The modified out-door system).
*Enough edible live snails.
*A good site near his house with the right kind of soil and the right
   amount of water for the snails to live and grow.
* Enough food and shelter plants
*The materials to build a pen for the snails.


                                 4
SELECTION OF SITE:
       A prospective snail farmer must choose a suitable site for
his farm. Important factors to consider are: Location, soil type,
moisture content, wind direction, lime content of the soil and
environmental temperature.

Location of Farm:
      The snail farm should preferably be located close to the
farmer’s house. In this way he will be able to watch his snail
regularly, detect any problem early, protect them from their
enemies and take care of them easily. There should be adequate
space for future expansion.

Soil Type:
        The snail farm must be sited at a place where the soil is rich
in humus and other decaying plant and animal materials. The soil
should contain sufficient lime or calcium for eggs and shell and
snails shell formation. Snails do not live in hard soils nor do they
live in loose sandy soils. Snails cannot dig into hard clayey soils
to rest and lay eggs while soils with a lot of sand do not hold
enough water. The ideal snail soil should be medium (light) to
allow air and water to penetrate easily.

Moisture content of Soil:
       Snails prefer damp soils. The farmer should avoid very wet
lands and lands prone to flooding in the rainy season. Dew and
rain keep the ground moist so that the snail can move easily and
dig into it to rest and lay their eggs.


                                  5
For a round the year production of snails, a ready source of water
supply for irrigation or spraying should be provided. Snails
usually seal off their aperture and go into hibernation during the
dry season unless a continuous supply of moisture                is
guaranteed. The soil could be kept continuously wet by the
provision of shelter plants like banana/plantain or the farm could
be watered to provide the necessary conditions for the survival
and multiplication of snails.

Wind Direction:
      Snail farms should be situated in sites well protected from
the wind. Strong winds during the snail growing season are bad
for snails because they lead to dehydration and subsequent
drying up of snails.

Temperature and Humidity:
       Snails are cold blooded animals and therefore sensitive to
change in atmospheric humidity and temperatures. In West
Africa, temperatures in the areas where most edible species of
snails are found do not fluctuate greatly. However, significant
fluctuation is in humidity below 75% induces the snails to
aestivate (i.e. to loose valuable growing time). Snails therefore
prefer a habitat that is neither too hot nor cold. When the
temperature is too hot or too cold, the snails withdraw into its
shell. This is called hibernation.        Snails thrive best on
temperatures of about 10 – 23°C.




                                6
CHOICE OF BREEDING STOCK:
       Like most livestock ventures, the success of a snail farm
depends in part on the quality of the farmer’s foundation stock. It
is recommended that the farmer should choose snails based on
the desirable characteristics below:

  i. Good strong shell:           Strong shells, protect snails from
     their enemies. Snails with cracked shells or thin shells
     should not be selected for a snail farm.
  ii.       Snails that fill their shell:       The farmer should
     choose only snails that fill their shells. A snail that does not fill
     its shell may be sick or it may have lost its water because of
     dry weather. It may not grow well.
  iii.      Fully-Grown Snails:          For his new snail farm, the
     farmer should choose only fully-grown snails as startment
     stock. They are hardier and would produce eggs and baby
     snails earlier than immature ones.
  iv.       Large Snails:         The larger snails of any kind of snail
     will be neater, healthier and lay more eggs than a snail that is
     smaller. The eggs of larger healthy snails hatch better and
     the baby snails grow bigger and faster. The farmer should
     therefore choose the largest of the fully grown snails of the
     type of snails he intends keeping.
  v.Same Kind of Snail:           The same kind of snail should be
     selected for the snail farm. The farmer may decide to use
     either the giant type of snails (e.g. Archatina achatina;
     Archachatina marginata) or the exotic small types (Helix
     pomatia, Helix aspersa ) .


                                   7
Never rear a mixture of small and large types in the same
enclosure. Their requirements and maturity periods are not the
same.

TYPES OF SNAILS TO FARM:
      Only snails that live on land and are edible should be
selected for farming. Some kinds of land snails habour parasites
which can cause diseases in man. Many species of edible land
snails are recognized in Nigeria. The popular species of
economic interest is the West African giant snail’s Archachatina
marginata and Achitina achatina. These are therefore the
recommended species.

Archachatina marginata:          These snails are found in places
where it is warm all year round. Their shells are characterized by
brown to pale brown colour with vertical streaks, zig-zag lines or
blotches. They weigh from 150 – 200 gm or more at maturity.
They grow to full size in 24 months if well fed and watered. They
lay about 5 – 10 eggs four to eight times each growing season.
The breeding season is from May to October (rainy season).
However, if provided with regular supply of water, food and lime,
they could grow and reproduce throughout the year. Their shell
length ranges from 90m to 130mm. They have rounded tails with
blackish foot.

Achatina achatina:          Like the Archachatina marginata, they
are native to West Africa. They have strong brown shells and
grow to full size in two years under good management conditions.
The lay more eggs per growing size.

                                8
Achatina achatina lays from 100 – 300 eggs, once to two times
each growing season. They have pointed tails with whitish to grey
foot.

Snail eggs:
      Generally, the eggs of snails are lemon yellow in colour and
resemble small bird’s eggs. The eggs hatch usually within 30
days. Young adult snails lay more eggs than old ones.

Where to get snails for your farm:
        The farmer can gather wild snails from nearby bushes for
use in his farm. He could also buy from people who gather and
sell wild snails. Snails could equally be bought from another snail
farmer in his locality. Snails bought from the open market should
never be farmed. Theses are of doubtful quality and may soon die
shortly after introduction into the pens.

CONSTRUCTION OF A SNAIL PEN (SNAILERY):
      The type of snail pen depends on a number of factors which
include:
*The scale of the snail farming enterprise;
*The type of snails farming i.e. In-door or Out-door;
*The stage of development and habits of the snails.
   This bulletin will discuss the construction of out-door snail pen.

Size of Snail Pen:
A snail pen can be large or small depending on how many snails
the farmer wants to raise. For a new farmer, it is advisable to start
with a small pen.

                                 9
He would need fewer materials and fewer snails for this. As he
becomes more experienced in snail farming, he can build a bigger
pen and get more snails to raise. A 5m x 5m out-door pen is a
suitable size to start with.

Preparation of site for 5m x 5m out-door snail pen:
      Choosing a suitable site close to the house. The snail
farmer should clear the area of all plant materials like bushes,
grasses, roots and weeds. The cleared materials should be
evenly spread on the ground where the pen would be located.
Burn the materials when dry. Burning of the area will clear it of
insects, weed, seeds, rats and other pests. From the cleared
area, a square of 5m x 5m is marked out for the snail farm. The
ground in the square is dug to a few centimeters dept (20cm) and
turned over with s shovel, hoe or other suitable implements. If
any more insects and other enemies of snails are seen, more
dried plant materials are spread on the ground and burnt again.
The ground is then smoothen after digging. The ground should
be smooth and well worked as it would be when planting a
vegetable garden.

Fencing of Pen:
On the smooth and well worked ground, a snail pen (5m x 5m) is
created by fencing the area with one or more of the following
materials:-
*Corrugated iron sheet
*Woven plant materials
*Plastic sheet


                               10
*Chicken wire mesh
*Wooden posts.
    Some of these materials (wire mesh, corrugated iron sheets,
plastic sheet) though durable, are expensive and unaffordable by
most farmers living in villages. However, woven plant materials
fence cover is cheap and available in most rural areas. Such
fences could be made from gamba grass or other tall grass
species. The fence is built just like any other fence. A number of
wooden posts of reasonable length are driven into the ground
along the perimeter of the (5m x 5m) farm, such that when in
place, each post is at least one meter above ground. When all the
posts are in place, dig a shallow trench (about 0.4m deep) all the
way round the pen. Attach the woven plant material (fence cover)
to the post and ensure that the plant material fence cover goes all
the way to the bottom of the trench. Whatever material that is
used for the fence of the snail pen should be buried to a
reasonable depth below ground. When woven plant is used, the
bottom of the material tends to rot after some time and needs
regular replacement. As soon as the plant material fence cover is
in place fill in the trench to complete the fence. If a combination of
chicken wire mesh and woven plant material is to be used,
followed by he woven plant material. The farmer should
remember to change the bottom of the fence cover when it rots.
To facilitate easy replacement of rotten material in future, the
fence cover could be made in two parts – one for the top and
another for the bottom of the fence. To prevent snails from
crawling out of the pen, flips could be attached to the top of the
pen. In some pen designs the fence covering is made of
mosquitoes wire netting.

                                 11
    Whatever materials that is used for the pen should ensure that
rats and other predators are kept out.
    At one corner of the snail pen, put a hatching chamber for
hatching snail’s eggs and a rearing unit for young snails (Fig. 1).
The hatching unit and rearing unit could be wooden boxes
covered with wire mesh or out drums or even baskets. The floor
of the hatchery or rearing unit is filled with rich organic/top soil to a
depth of 4-7cms. Perforate the bottom of such chambers to drain
out excess water. Do not introduce newly hatched young snails
into snail’s pens to avoid cannibalism.
    Other types of out-door snailery include the following:




   Figure 1: Modified outdoor snail pen (from the top)


                                   12
  Fig. 2: Single unit hutch box (with lid open).




Figure 3: Multichanbered hutch boxes (with one lid opend)


                           13
(a)    Hutch Box Method:
The hutch boxes which could be single (Fig. 2) or multi-
chambered (Fig. 3) are wooden boxes with lids. The lids are
openings covered with wire netting or nylon mesh. The floors of
the boxes are filled with sieved organic soil to a depth of 5 – 8 cm,
which must be slightly limed (Caco3). The bottom of the hutch
boxes have holes to allow excess water to drain out. The hutch
boxes are put under trees like rubber, cocoa, citrus and even
plantain for shade. When hutch boxes are used, the soil is
changed once every two to three months.


(b) Trench Pens:
In the trench type, pens, square or rectangular holes (depending
on the desired shape of pen) are dug in the ground about 50cm
deep. The dug up area is divided into pens and the sides are built
up to 2 – 3 blocks high from the ground level while the bottom is
covered with loose soil. The pens are covered with nylon mesh
nailed to wooden frames for lids. The trench pens which more or
less look like the hutch pens could be used for hatching snail
eggs, rearing and for finishing.

(c) Make-shift Snailaries:
Snail keeping as a hobby or on a very small scale could be done
using the following make-shift outfits:-
       i. Stack of old motor types
       ii. Baskets
       Iii.Boxes

                                 14
      iv.      Pots and calabashes
      v. Cut drums, old basins etc.
      In each case, the tops are covered with wire or nylon mesh.

INTRODUCTION OF SNAILS INTO PEN:
        With the food and shelter plants in place, the snails can
now be put into the pen. Snails selected for the farm should be
very gently handled and carefully put into a container such as
basket. In this way, they can be carried to the pen without hurting
them. Before putting them in the pen, all grasses and weeds
should be eliminated. The snails should be put in the pen in the
evening when it is cool. They should never be put at the period of
the day when the sun is hot. On days that no dew is available and
the leaves of the plant and the ground are dry, wet them before
putting the snails in. The newly introduced snails should be
placed in different locations in the pen. Only the right number of
snails should be put in the pen. Do not stock more than 15 – 25
mature snails/m2. There should be no overstocking. After
introduction of snails a check should be conducted the following
morning to see that they have all moved. Any snails found to be
dead should be taken out and replaced by equal number of snails.
At first the newly introduced snails will try to crawl out of the pen.
The farmer should go round each morning and put them back.
After about two weeks he snails will become used to their new
homes and most of them will not try to crawl out.




                                 15
FEEDS AND FEEDING OF SNAILS:
       Snails are voracious feeders and may consume about 10
time their body weight of leafy vegetable or plant material every
day. To be successful in snail farming, the farmer must ensure a
steady uninterrupted supply of foodstuffs to his snails throughout
the snail growing season.

Food Plants:
Snails feed on a wide variety of cultivated and wild plants. Young
tender green leaves as well as dead and decaying leaves are
eaten. Green leaves of Amaranthus, cocoyam, cassava, lettuce,
cabbage, fluted pumpkin, hibiscus, are all eaten by snails. Before
beginning, the farmer should find out what plants his snails like to
eat. He can thus get information from an experienced snail
farmer in his locality. He can also with his lantern watch snails at
night and see what they are eating. Different plant materials
could be dropped in the pen and by trial and error, he could find
out which ones the snail would prefer.

Fruit Trees as shelter and food Plants:
        Some fruit trees provide shelter as well as food for snails.
Banana, plantain, mango, pawpaw, sweet oranges, cocoa etc
serve dual purpose of providing shelter as well as fruits. Snails
prefer feeding on over ripe fruits of these trees. Ripe oil palm
fruits, broken pods, seeds and seedlings of cocoa are also
consumed by snails.
        Generally, snails usually hide on shelter plants during the
day when it is dry and move to food plants to eat at night or early in
the morning when they are wet with dew.

                                 16
Other Feeds:
Snails also feed on synthetic diets containing a good amount of
protein, calcium and phosphorus. An example of such diet is
poultry marsh. Wet poultry droppings, rotten vegetables and
dead animals are all consumed by snails. Apart from the items
mentioned here, there are many other foods in the farmer’s
locality which snails like to eat. As stated earlier, these could be
found out by trial and error.

Feeding Habit of Snails:
Snails are nocturnal and feed on a wide variety of feed mainly in
the night, early morning, evening or on cold rainy day. Their
activity level (including their rate of feeding) fluctuates with the
ambient temperature.

TAKING CARE OF THE SNAILS:
       After the snails are put in the pen, the farmer should:
   *Watch them carefully to see that they are eating well.
   *Give them the right type of food in adequate quantity.
   *Wet the food and shelter plants and moisten the ground
     regularly.
   On dry days during the snail growing season, water the ground
daily. Always water in the evening at sunset. Ensure that the soil
is moist and not wet. In areas with dry season, when plants do not
grow, snails dig into the ground to rest. They should not be
watered at this time, otherwise the snails come out of the ground
when they should not. The snails breeding season in Nigeria
corresponds to the period of the rainy seasons.


                                17
  CAUSES OF MORTALITY IN SNAILS:
      Snails have many enemies. These include termites,
soldier ants, frogs, toads, rats, snail eating birds, lizards, and
larvae of some beetles. Common salt is also poisonous to snails.
Over crowding is a serious cause of mortality in snail pens. When
too many snails are crowded in a pen, they produce undesirable
secretion which is observed to reduce their productivity. To
remedy these;
   *Examine the pen fence regularly and mend any openings.
   *Use materials that keep out pests from your fence.
   *Maintain the right stocking density in you pen.
   *Keep away poisonous chemicals like common salt.

HARVESTING SNAILS:
       Generally, snails that are well fed and managed would be
ready for harvesting within 12 to 24 months from the date of
stocking. Also, when the farmer sees a lot of baby snails in the
snail pen, he could harvest the fully grown snails that he first put
into the pen. Average weight of a snail a well matured snail of the
giant type is 200gm. It takes not less than two years of efficient
feeding to attain this weight. Growth rate is slow and a lot
patience has to be exercised in snail farming.

How to Harvest:
Harvesting is done with the hands. Sometimes the snails hide
under the cover of vegetation. Easiest time to find them is when
the plants are wet (after it has rained) or at night when there is dew
and they are moving about eating.


                                 18
The farmer can also put in some of the food that snails like (e.g.
ripe pawpaw) and when they comet to eat, the farmer can collect
them. When harvesting, snails should be carefully handled and
put in a container such as basket, box or net sack. Too many
snails (more than 10kg) should not be put in one container
otherwise those at the bottom would be injured.

What to do with harvested snails:
The harvested snails could either be sold or retained for family
consumption. Snails meant for sale should have clean, intact
shells. They should be carried to the market in suitable
containers like baskets or box. Snails could be stored alive in
containers filled with materials such as saw dust or chipped maize
husks for as long as 6 – 8 weeks.


Economics of Snail Production:
      Unlike other livestock enterprises, housing for snails is
cheap to construct. Snails could easily be kept even in make shift
housing. The feeding of snails is cheap, snails do not compete
with man for food, rather, they feed on the wastes from man’s
kitchen, poultry droppings, leaves and over ripe/rotten fruits.
Snails have very high multiplication ratio.
The A. marginata for example lays up to 80 – 100 eggs/growing
season while the A. achatina lays up to 300 eggs or more in a
growing season. Snails hatch within 30 days and in 12 – 24
months are ready for table. One snail therefore can in a growing
season give 100 – 300 new snails (depending on the breed).


                               19
 Labour requirement for attending to snails is very low. 1 man
hour/day can care for 100 snails.
        If a farmer started with 10 snails which cost about N400
(Umuahia Market – June 2008), in a growing season the 10 snails
will give about 10 x 300 eggs = 3,000 eggs. When hatched and
reared, and allowing 10% mortality, in a growing season, the
farmer will come up with about 2,700 new snails. Feeding on
leaves, fruits and kitchen waste, the farmer spends nothing on
feed.
        At maturity; the 2,700 will sell at
               2,700 x N40 = N108,000

        Internationally, snail meat commands good market in
Europe and North America. The French snail requirement is
about 5 million kg/annum, out this, more than 60% is imported.
Italy is said to consume about 306 million snails annually. Back
home in West Africa, Cote d’Ivoire has an estimated annual snail
consumption of 7.9 million kg. Although the annual snail
consumption figure for Nigeria is not known, one thing is certain
that the demand is far ahead of the supply. Snail farming in
Nigeria therefore has very bright future.




                               20
Summary and conclusion

Snail meat (Congo meat) is a high protein food. Collection from the
wild is not sustainable. Therefore conscious efforts should be made to
rear snails in captivity.
To start a snail farm, the following are required: enough edible live
snails, a good site, enough food and shelter plants and a pen for the
snail. Snails require soil that is rich in humus with enough calcium for
shell and egg formation. Snails prefer damp soils. Protect snails from
wind. Snails are cold blooded. Therefore avoid sudden changes in
atmospheric humidity and temperature. Choose snails for rearing that
conform to: good strong shell; snails that fill their shell; fully grown and
large snails. House only one type of snail together construct snail pens
using materials available in your environment and according to your
resources. Do not stock more than 15-25 snails/m .   2




Ensure steady and uninterrupted. Food supply to snails on dry days,
water the ground daily. Keep solider ants, frogs, toads, rats, snail eating
birds, lizards and some beetle larvae off snail farm. Avoid common salt
in snail farm. Snails mature in 12 – 24 months.
Snail farming is very profitable and therefore highly recommended
even as a hobby.




                                    21
Bibliography

  1.    A. A. Awa (2003) MTRN Monograph (unpublished) Rubber
        Research Institute of Nigeria, Benin City

  2.    Chowdhuny, SMZH, Mondal, MMH, Hug, S and Rahman, M.
        H. (1994). Prevalence of Fascida cercarrcae in lymnaeid
        snails in Bangladesh. Asian – Australian Journal of Animal
        Science, 1994. 7 (3) 401-403.

  3.    Food and Agriculture Organisation (FAO) 1989.           Snail
        production series 11-29. Rome Italy.

  4.    Michael Okpara University of Agriculture (2002). Snail
        Production Monograph (Unpublished) Umudike, Abia State
        Nigeria.

  5.    Udoh A. P. Akanyung E. O. and Igiran, I. E. Nutrients and anti
        nutrients in small snails for chemistry. 1995. 53 (3) 239-241.




                                22
