 THE PRODUCTION OF GUINEA
      FOWL IN NIGERIA




                Extension Bulletin No207
                  Poultry Series No.8



NATIONAL AGRICULTURAL EXTENSION AND RESEARCH LIAISON
                      SERVICES
              AHMADU BELLO UNIVERSITY
                     P.M.B. 1067
                   ZARIA NIGERIA.
                         ACKNOWLEGEMENT

        Animal protein intake of an average Nigerian still falls short of the
Food and Agricultural organization (FAO) recommended level. The
demand for animal protein far exceeds the supply. In order to meet the
increasing demand for animal protein, other non-conventional sources
need to be exploited. This is the driving force behind this bulletin.
Guinea fowl, is largely unimproved in Nigeria, but has great potentials
to bridge the demand supply gap in animal protein intake.
        We wish to express our gratitude and to acknowledge the
scientists, researchers and authors, whose work and relevant data
were pooled to make this booklet a complete information package for all
those interested in the production and consumption of Guinea fowl.
        The contribution and cooperation of NAERLS staff, particularly
the staff of Livestock and Fisheries Programme are highly appreciated.

                       E.I. Ikani and I. I. Dafwang


                                   2004
TABLE OF CONTENTS


1.    Acknowledgement................................                     i
2.    Table of Content......................................              1
3.    Introduction............................................            2
4.    Varieties of Guinea Fowl...................                         5
5.    Production Systems.........................                           8
6.    Selection of Foundation Stock ...........                           10
7.    Housing and Equipment ................................ 17
8.    Feed and Feeding .................................                  17
9.    Health Care Management ............................... 22
10.    Meat Processing and Utilization ...............                      24
11.   Marketing ......................................................... 26
12.   Summary ......................................................        27
13.   References .................................................... 28




                                            2
INTRODUCTION
        Guinea fowl belongs to the pheasant family. The bird is commonly
found in the Western, Central and Southern parts of Africa. The name “Guinea
fowl” is derived from the Guinea coast of Africa, which is where the birds are
believed to have originated. In West Africa the grey breasted and helmeted
varieties are common the areas bordering the Sahara. In Nigeria, many
households in the North keep guinea fowls, and the meat and eggs are very
popular. The flesh is white and delicate with distinctive game flavour and the
carcasses weigh between (0.5-1.0kg) at ten weeks, which make them suitable
table birds for the small family.

Advantages for Keeping Guinea Fowls
·        The guinea fowls are always more capable of coping with the effects of
dry weather conditions prevailing in the Northern Guinea Savanna and
Sahelian ecological zones than other domestic poultry.
·        Guinea fowls are apparently free from the poultry diseases that are
worrisome to most farmers and scientists.
·        In many urban homes the guinea fowl meat is used as substitute for
game birds. The flesh of young guinea fowl is tender and has a fine flavour
resembling that of wild game.
·        The guinea fowl egg commands premium market prices because of the
gammy flavour and has better storage ability than the chicken egg. The egg
shell does not crack easily due to thickness. The eggs are believed to enhance
virility and sexual potency.
·        Guinea fowls with their eggs are used for scientific research, notably in
physiology studies.
·        The birds are less expensive to buy by a beginner and are less of
financial risk to maintain on the farm.
·        The over 50 million semi-domesticated guinea fowls in Nigeria
constitute about 25% of the entire domestic poultry population in Nigeria,
making it a variable source of animal protein which is socially acceptable.


                                        3
VARIETIES OF GUINEA FOWL
The wild Species
Many species of wild guinea fowl are found in Nigeria. The common
domesticated guinea fowls descended from one of these wild species (Numida
Meleagris). They exist in the grass land areas spreading form derived savanna
to the northern guinea savanna vegetation zone. The forest dwelling crested
guinea fowls (Guttera edouardi edourdi) also exist in Nigeria particularly to
the Southern region. In the wild about 15-20 eggs are laid during the breeding
season .
Branches of trees are usually utilized as roosting sites at night and as places of
escape from hunters during day light period. Breeding is largely restricted to
the wet season.

Domesticated Varieties
Guinea fowls have been domesticated for many centuries; they were raised as
table birds by the ancient Greeks and Romans.
There are two main species of guinea fowl in Nigeria, which have been
described; the crested guinea fowl (Guttera edopuardi) which is found in the
rain forest zones and derived savanna and the helmeted guinea fowl found in
the savannas. However the commonly known varieties are five, they are
namely:




                                        4
1. Pearl Variety
This guinea fowl has a purplish gray plumage, regularly dotted or splashed
with white. The bird is so handsome that the feathers are often used for
ornamental purposes. See fig 1 below




                    Figure 1: The Pearl Guinea Fowl.
The Pearl variety of guinea fowl is the most popular in this country.
2. The Grey Breasted Variety
This guinea fowl has grey or white breast feathers with the plumage like that of
the pearl variety (Fig. 2)


                                       5
       These two varieties are the most common guinea fowls in Nigeria and
do have great potentials for commercial production in the poultry industry
because of their wide acceptability.

3. The Lavender Variety
This guinea fowl also resemble the pearl variety, but the plumage is light gray
or lavender regularly dotted with white markings (Fig 3)




                           Figure. 3 The Lavender Guinea Fowl
4. The White Variety
This variety like the name indicates, has pure white plumage. Its skin is lighter
in colour than that of the pearl variety (Fig. 4)




               Figure 4: The White Variety of Guinea Fowl

                                       6
        The pure white colour of this variety is definitely an advantageous with
respect to minimizing heat stress during the excessive heat period.
PRODUCTION SYSTEMS
         The systems of keeping guinea fowls like in the other poultry species
refer to the extent to which the birds are allowed access to green runs (pasture)
and exposure to sunshine. The different management systems for raising
guinea fowls are as below:

1. Extensive (Free Range) System
This system of guinea fowl management is the most common in Nigeria, and
suitable for those farmers with lot of land and fields of pasture. In this
management system, the birds are not confined and thus are free to fend for
their own feed and roost, as well as ridding the field of insect pests and weed
seeds (Fig 5). Because the birds find their own food and shelter, the
management is almost at no cost to the farmer. However, the free-range
management system cannot be practiced on an intensive commercial scale as
the birds could easily revert to the feral state and might not be easily caught
when needed.




                   Figure. 5: Guinea Fowl on Free-Range


                                       7
Also, on free range the birds are exposed to extremes of climatic conditions,
which often results in heavy losses predatory beast, parasites and infections
diseases. This system of production is therefore, not recommended for
intensive commercial scale, but for the small-scale back yard production.

2. Semi Intensive System
This system requires a permanent housing with attached fenced runs or
pasture. They should be in the minimum, two pasture areas (Fig 6). The birds
should have access to each plot in turn, while the other pasture is rested, and
the number of birds raised depends on the amount of land available. This
method is particularly suitable where land is limited and small holder farms.
Under the semi intensive system, disease conditions could be common and
therefore, requires close monitoring and control. At the present levels of
guinea fowl production in Nigeria, this system seems suitable and therefore
recommended.




                Figure. 6: Semi-Intensive Management of Guinea Fowl
3. Intensive System
This is the system, which is used commercially and involves confining the
birds in doors either in battery cages or on deep litter within a large controlled
environment.


                                        8
The food and water requirements of the birds are made available all the
time. See figure 7 below.




                Figure. 7: Intensive System of Guinea Fowl Keeping

        In Nigeria, rearing guinea fowl on the deep litter at commercial level of
production is common. The deep litter system consists of solid buildings with
suitable litter materials such as wood shavings; dry maize cobs and chopped
straw. The system affords effective insulation of the birds from outside
atmospheric conditions while Perches are provided for the birds as from the
fourth week of age.
        This system is recommended for large scale commercial guinea fowl
production, because it allows high stock density, efficient management of
resources and labour, resulting in high production output.

Selection of foundation stock
         Selection of foundation stock is one of the first decisions to be made by
the starting guinea fowl farmer. It is recommended that the beginner purchases
his foundation stock form very reliable guinea fowl raisers within the locality.


                                        9
On commercial farm it is advisable to purchase day old keets (young guinea
fowls). But be sure that the birds have steady legs, alert eyes, healthy looking
and with no physical defects. Do not buy guinea fowl, which look ‘sleepy’.
This could be an indication of ill health.
Sexing Guinea Fowls
        It is difficult to differentiate the male guinea fowl from the female one.
This is because there is so little difference in their appearance that many
farmers find it not easy to distinguish them particularly in the young ones.
Farmers who are inexperienced in keeping these birds may unknowingly keep
all males or all females as breeding stock.
        However, sex may easily be distinguished between the cocks from the
hens by the difference in the cry of the birds and by the larger helmet and
wattles and the coarser head of the males. See figure 8a and b below.




        Fig 8a Guinea Cock              Fig. 8b Guinea Hen
        The cry of the hen sounds like “buckwheat, buckwheat’ or put rock,
put-rock” which is quite different from the one syllable shriek of the cock.
When frightened both the cock and the hen make one-syllable cries, but at no
time does the cock’s cry sound like “buckwheat, buckwheat”. Sexing the
birds by this way is possible when the birds are about 8 weeks of age.
        In keets (between 12-15 weeks of age) the wattles have thicker edges
than do those of the females.



                                       10
Mating
         Guinea fowls are naturally seasonal breeders because of their
monogamous characteristic. And so for a commercial breeding programme
artificial insemination would be of great advantage. However, for the small
scale farmer who keeps the birds on the range, the practice of keeping fewer
number cocks in a flock is better. This is because the cock often prepares the
nests for a group of guinea hens that flock with him. This is why it is common
to find 20 to 30 eggs in a single nest during the egg producing season in the
wild. The nests are usually located in well hidden places making it difficult for
the farmer to locate the nests when many males are kept. Such eggs also may
be of poor fertility due to the monogamous tendency of the males. Once the
egg nests are located, farmers are advised to leave at least three newly marked
or dummy eggs in the nests during each collection to encourage the guinea
fowl hen to continue using the same nest during the breeding next season.
         In the wild reproductive pairs are established during the rains, the pairs
and their offsprings merge together with others to form larger groups at the end
of the breeding season. Thus in improved husbandry programme, efforts
should be made to ensure continuous breeding and elimination of permanent
pairs bonds between reproductive adults.


Egg Production
         Guinea fowls come into lay at about 25 to 28 weeks of age and will
continue to lay for about 8 months producing between 150 to 160 eggs during
the first laying period. The second laying period may start at 12 to 14 weeks
after the end of first and may last for 4 to 5 / months producing slightly higher
                                             1
                                                 2


number of eggs than that produced during the first cycle. The egg production
efficiency however, depends on breeding stock and management.




                                        11
Egg collection should be done daily but do not disturb the hens while they are
laying.
        Guinea fowl eggs are smaller than chicken eggs. They weigh between
35 to 40 grammes as compared to between 45 to 55 grammes in the chickens
fig 9. The eggs collected should be stored in cool dry place.




          Fig 9: Egg of G/Fowl (Left) and Chicken egg (right)
Egg Incubation
       Guinea fowls are not particularly good mothers and the eggs are best
hatched under broody chicken hens naturally or by artificial incubation using
incubators.

i. Natural Incubation
The incubation period of guinea fowl egg is between 26 to 28 days. The
natural incubation method is commonly used by farmers with small flocks.
The chicken hens are usually used because they are more adaptable than
guinea fowl hens which are too wild to be set anywhere except in the nests
where they have become broody. From 12 to 15 eggs may be set under a
guinea hen, while 20 to 28 eggs can be set under a large chicken hen. See
figure 10 below.



                                     12
                          Figure. 10: Natural Incubation

Hens should be treated against lice before they are set. Also ensure adequate
food and water for the broody hens.

ii. Artificial Incubation
The artificial method of incubation is by the use of machines called incubators.
The incubators which are of different types have in-built devices for the
production of controlled heating at recommended temperature, controlled
humidity level and egg turning ability. Fig 11.
Recommended temperature and humidity of the air within incubators are
about the same for both guinea fowl and turkey eggs. Temperature level of
38 c with 58% humidity for the first 3 weeks are recommended. But the
  0




temperature should be lowered to 36 c while the humidity be raised to 75% for
                                     0




the last week in the incubator. Each egg should be turned at least 4 to 5 times
daily for the first 24 days of incubation.
Kerosene incubators are recommended for rural farmers who keep small flock
and have no access to electricity.



                                         13
       The Nigeria Veterinary Research Institute (NVRI) made kerosene
incubators at Vom Plateau state is good enough for Nigerian guinea fowl
small holder egg hatching. See figure 10




               Figure. 11: The Kerosine Incubator

Keets Brooding
       Brooding of keets could be done by the natural method or by artificial
brooding.

a) Natural Brooding of Keets
Guinea fowl hens are not highly reputed for the care of their young ones. It
will be necessary to separate the newly hatched keets from their mothers.
Guinea hens are likely to take their keets through wet grass and lead them too
far from the home. The common practice, is to give out newly hatched keets to
a broody chicken hen to raise. A large chicken hen will brood as many as 25
keets. For the first 2-3 days the hen and keets should be confined to an
enclosure, after that time they should be allowed to range (fig. 12). However,
shelter should be provided at night to keep out predatory animals.


                                     14
                 Figure. 12: Natural Brooding
        Keets raised by natural method will usually leave the brooders house
from the age of 6 to 8 weeks and will begin roosting at night in a near by trees in
the open air. But if they have been accustomed to going into the house at night
in company of the chicken mother hen they are so trained and will not be so
difficult to catch when they are wanted for the market.


b) Artificial Brooding
The newly hatched keets may be raised with the same kinds of brooders and
brooden houses as are used for chickens or turkeys. The recommended
brooding methods and temperatures are similar to those used for chickens.
Artificial brooding using electric bulbs can be started at a temperature range of
34-40 c for the first 3 weeks. This should be reduced under the brooder to 30-
      0




35 c between 4 and 6 weeks and 28-32 c as from 7 to 8 weeks. Thereafter,
  0             th     th                    0         th   th




heating can be discontinued except during the cold seasons. These
temperatures can be attained using 12 x 60 watt bulbs per 50m floor space or
                                                                   2




18 x 40 watts bulbs at about 15cm above the floor. Kerosene lamp could also
be used as a cheap and readily available source of producing warmth for young
guinea fowls.


                                        15
The brooder house should be constructed to provide both warmth and
adequate ventilation for the keets and located where there should be the least
disturbance, which could cause losses due to pilling up as a result of frights.
Over crowding should be avoided and any form of disturbances e.g. noise, too
frequent visits and sight of other animals. Corner guards are useful to prevent
pilling up while pinioning of wings helps to reduce flightiness. Fig 13 below
gives an example of artificial brooding system.




                 Figure. 13: Artificial Brooding of Keets.
HOUSING AND EQUIPMENT
        Commercially, guinea fowls are kept confined in suitably adapted
buildings on a 75mm litter of wood shavings. Adequate ventilation is
important because the droppings are much drier than those of other poultry
and this leads to a dustier atmosphere and therefore to an increased risk of
respiratory diseases. Over stocking should also be avoided.


Rearing Pen
   · The floor of rearing pen should be cemented and slightly slopped to
      facilitate easy cleaning and washing.
   · Dwarf walls (1m high) made of block or dried brick or mud are
      adequate.

                                      16
    On top of the wall should be a chicken wire mesh of 2.5m high supported
      by wooden frames.
   · Ventilation holes should be made into the walls but with movable
      cover of plank to regulate heat.
   · Roof could be made of asbestos to ensure cooling
   · Perches may also be provided.
Space Requirement/Stock Density
         Floor space requirement of about 0.06m should be allowed per bird
                                                  2




from day old till maturity. Stocking density is at the rate of 100 birds per 55-
65m . A stocking rate of more than 16 birds per meter is over crowding and can
    2




result to heavy losses. Up to 50% of the entire flock could be lost through such
over stocking. Over stocked birds also look unthrifty and do not normally
grow well.
         It is also advisable not to under stock, as the birds, especially when
young tend to wonder far away from sources of heat, food and water, which
often cause death due to starvation. In order to ensure optimum performance,
rearing size should not exceed a thousand birds.
         Equipment for rearing of guinea fowls are the same with that of
chickens which includes drinkers, feeders, and nest boxes, while lighting
devices are optional.
FEEDS AND FEEDING
        In the wild, guinea fowls diets are naturally rich and include grass
seeds, crop wastes, and about 60 species of insects. In the villages, free range
guinea fowls feed along with the local chickens and scientists tend to believe
that the nutrient requirements of guinea fowls are similar to those of the
chickens.
        However, in captivity, adequate feeding of birds with balanced diets is
very important for the production of fast growing healthy guinea fowls. The
guinea fowl being a range bird could be allowed access to the pasture with
good fresh plants e.g. stylo, tridax and water leaf.

                                      17
Guinea fowls have relatively small crops and therefore, need feeding more
frequently than other poultry. Commercially, guinea fowls are fed much the
same as turkeys. Also, a broiler type ration is known to support good body
weight gains in guinea fowls. However, some coccidiostat additives in
poultry rations are toxic to guinea fowl if they exceed certain levels. You
should check this point with your feed supplier before giving your birds such
rations.
         For rapid growth rate, it is recommended to start guinea fowls on high
protein diets containing 25% - 26% crude protein and about 3200 kcal/kg for
the first 6 weeks of life. Between 6 to 12 weeks of age a diet containing 20%
crude protein and 3200kcal/kg is best. Above 12 weeks of age till market size
is attained, the protein levels in the diets may be reduced to 18%, (see tables 1
& 2 below).
         The feed intake of guinea fowl is between 25-30g; 50-60g and 70-80g
per bird per day, between the ages of 0-6, 6-12 and 12-16 weeks respectively.
Feed consumption record of guinea fowl is apparently high because of the
tendency to waste the feed due to their manner of scooping and picking of the
feed. This feed wastage could be minimized by feeding the required feed
twice daily rather than ad lib and using deeper feeders for adults. Feed in
pelleted form can also solve the wastage problems. Clean water should be
made available always. It is also advisable that finely chopped tender green
leaves be scattered a little on guinea fowl rations. Feeding the guinea fowl on
range in late afternoon has the advantage of making them to return to their
coop (shelter) at night.




                                       18
Table 1: Feed and Feeding Requirement for Broiler Guinea Fowl
Age        Protein   Energy    Amount       Lysine       Meth       Meth +     Ca          P
(Weeks)    (%)       Value     of Feed                              cystine
                     Kcal/kg   needed
                               per day
                               (g)
  0–5        25.5     3200       25 – 30         1.38     0.55       1.00      1.00        0.39

  5–8         20      3100      50 – 60          0.99     0.42       0.88      0.90        0.35

  8 – 12      18      3100      70 – 80          0.79     0.33       0.66      0.80        0.33


 Sources: Tewe (1983)




Table 2: Nutrient Levels for Breeders
Age        Protein   Energy    Amount       Lysine      Methcytst      Ca        P (%)
(Weeks)    (%)       Kcal/kg   of Feed                                 (%)
                               Needed
                               (g)
 1–6          22       3000     25 – 27         1.20       0.81         0.70        0.40

 6 – 28      14.0      2800     55 – 60         0.65       0.59         0.60        0.35

Breeder    17 – 18     2800     70 – 80         0.90       0.59         2.70        0.55


 Source: Offiong (1983)




                                           19
However, as from the ages of 8-10 weeks rearing guinea fowls on free range
may be combined with confinement if the birds are pinioned or wind clipped.
Two fenced range or pasture areas on either side of the fixed building with
tender and fresh greens are highly recommended. The two fenced range
conditions will allow pasture grazing rotation and reduce the incidence of
diseases.

Feeder and Drinker Requirement
In intensive method of production, few hours (2-3hrs) before the newly
hatched keets are received on the farm, feed should be placed on pieces of
paper or flat trays, while drinkers should be placed around to get the birds
familiar with them. The drinkers should be filled with clean cool water, and
positioned about 1m from the wall but away from sources of heat. Coloured
feeders and drinkers are preferred. Red colour is favoured because it attracts
the keets. Drinking spaces of 1cm, 1.5cm - 3.0cm and 3.0-5cm per bird should
be allowed for the first 4 weeks, 5-12 weeks and 12-16 weeks old respectively
Table 3.
Table 3: Feeder and Drinker Requirement/100birds
 Age (weeks) Drinker Requirement Feeder Requirement

  0-4             2 x 4 liter - size         2 x 1.2m size

  4-8             4 x 4 liter size           3 x 1.2m size

  8-16            4 x 4 liter size           4 x 1.2m size

  16 and above    6 x liter size             5 x 1.2m size

Source: Offiong (1983)


                                       20
         HEALTH CARE AND MANAGEMENT
It is generally believed that guinea fowls are more resistant to parasitic
infestations than the domestic chickens. However, with high stocking density,
on large intensive farms, there could be occasions when ailing guinea fowls
are noticed on the farm. Often, it is nothing serious, but there is the chance that
it could be. It is therefore important to be able to recognize general and
specific symptoms and develop the ‘stockman’s eye’ which will help spot any
unusual behaviour in the birds at an early stage.
         The major parasites that have been reported infecting guinea fowls in
Nigeria are such like Heterakis spp and Ascaridia galli while Eimeria spp are
the most important gastro intestinal protozoan parasites. It is also known that
A. galli, Heterakis spp and Eimeria spp are responsible for deaths especially
among the young ones. The practice in most farms, with considerable success
had been to treat guinea fowls with the same drugs as those recommended for
the treatment of other poultry, particularly chickens. However, in Nigeria, no
viral disease has been incriminated in local guinea fowls.
         In guinea fowl, like other domestic birds, prevention is obviously
better than cure and you can avoid diseases a great deal by good sanitary
conditions. This can be attained by the following health management
practices.

a) Cleanliness
Ensure that all feed and drink containers are kept clean. Clean stock house
regularly and place fresh litter in nest boxes. This litter material replacement
could be done monthly along with a clean surrounding and proper drainage
systems.




                                        21
b) Adequate Feeding
The issue of a balanced diet cannot be over emphasized in themanagement of
guinea fowls. They should be allowed access to fresh, clean water at all times.
For guinea fowls on pastures, the principle of rotational grazing should be
applied to avoid over grazing and access to fresh greens.

c) Action Against Lice, Mites and Other Pests
Houses, perches and nest boxes should have regular dusting with powder to
control infestation. Treat the birds and pay particular attention to the areas
under the wings, at the back of the head and around the vent. (Figure 13).




Fig 13: Dusting Guinea Fowl against Parasites.

               Also, sick and decaying dead bodies should be removed as
soon as they are observed while veterinary attention should immediately be
drawn to any disease condition.


                                      22
MEAT PROCESSING AND UTILIZATION
        Work on the nutritional value has revealed that the meat and eggs of
guinea fowls are tastier than those of chickens. It is also known that the meat
contained higher levels of protein and some minerals than those of exotic
chickens. However, from the farm to the table, the guinea fowl carcass needs
to go through processing. This involves steps like slaughtering, scalding or
feather picking, evisceration and meat cutting.

Slaughtering
        Guinea fowls that are earmarked for slaughter should be deprived of
feed for a period of 24 hours, but clean cool water should be given. This is to
ensure easiness of cleaning during evisceration. To slaughter; severe the
jugular vein by the neck to ensure thorough bleeding. Severing of the neck by
cutting should be by the use of a sharp knife and should be done quickly to
avoid unnecessary suffering by the bird. (Figure 15):




           Figure. 15: Slaughtering.


                                      23
Scalding/Dry Picking
Guinea fowl feathers can be removed by scalding which actually is done by
dipping the slaughtered bird into a bowl of hot water as soon as the bird is
confirmed dead but before the carcass gets cold. This takes a period of about
6-12 minutes for easy removal of the feathers. The feathers can also be dry
picked. To do this successfully, the mouth of the bird is severed first to ensure
good bleeding, and the knife is then thrust through the groove in the roof of the
mouth into the brain. When the brain is pierced, the feathers are loosened by a
convulsive movement of the muscles, this makes them easier to pick. (Fig. 16)




       Fig. 16: Dry Picking Guinea Fowl Feathers.




                                       24
Evisceration
         This is the removal of the gut content of guinea fowl after scalding.
The process is by cutting open the neck muscles close to the body leaving a flap
of skin to close the hole through which the crop is removed along with gizzard,
lungs, heart and liver through the rear of the carcass. The intestines can
thereafter be removed out of the body.

Carcass Cut and Use
        After going through the processes indicated above, the next step is
cutting the carcass into pieces of meat for family use. This is achieved by first
removing the leg sinews and drawing them out from the entire limb. Then cut
out the legs off from below the knee joint. The wings and head could be
removed from the body. Finally, the carcass is pieced into standard meat cuts
(Figure 17).




                     Figure. 17: Guinea fowl Meat Cuts




                                       25
        These meat cuts can then be converted into different food dishes by
frying, roasting or boiling in stew and soup. These are regarded as delicacies,
particularly with respect to the gummy flavour and taste of guinea fowl meat.

MARKETING
        There is no organized guinea fowl market in Nigeria. Farmers sell
their birds as the needs arise in the household particularly in times of urgent
petty-cash needs. The market channel is such that the middle men pick up the
birds at the farm gates, sell to retailers from where it gets to the consumers.
Sales of such birds by hawkers along major high ways is common. Also sales
of dressed roasted whole guinea fowls by road sides in urban centres are
common place in the northern part of the country.




                                      26
                                 SUMMARY
·       Start guinea fowl farm with good foundation stock purchased from
good and reliable local farmers.
·       The grey breasted helmet guinea fowl variety is well adapted in
Nigeria and it is recommended.
·       The guinea fowl house should be situated in properly drained area with
free flow of air. The house also should be rat and snake proofed, and in a
noiseless environment. Avoid any situation that causes panic especially
during brooding.
·       Ensure provision of adequate balanced diet and clean water at all
times.
·       Keep one male to between 4 – 6 guinea fowl hens.
·       Ensure a very clean environment around and inside the guinea fowl
house and remove all decaying bodies.
·       Keep good farm record for easy assessment of farm operations.




                                     27
                     Bibliography

Ayeni, J.S.O. and Oyedipe, F.P.A. (1981). Protein abundance through guinea
        fowl production. Paper presented at National Conf. On “farm food
        deficiency to food sufficiency, River State University of Science and
        Technology, Port Harcourt.
Ayeni, J.S.O, Aire, T.A. and Olomu, J.M (Eds) – 1983; The helmet guinea
        fowl in Nigeria. Proc. Of Conf. On State of Knowledge Workshop on
        the Grey Breasted Helmet Guinea Fowl at KLRI – New Busa.
Okaeme, A.N, Ayorinde, K.L and Ayeni, J.S.O. (1986). A general guideline on
        guinea fowl management for meat production published by Kainji
        Lake Research Institute New Busa.
Thear, K and Alistair Fraser Eds. (1986): The complete book of raising
        livestock and poultry – A self sufficiency guide. Publ. By University
        Services Ltd. Educational Publishers P.M.B. 1038 Lagos
U.S Dept of Agric. (1976) Raising guinea fowl. Printed by Govt. Printing
        Office Washington D.C.




                                     28
29
30
31
32
